



<!-- TOC -->

- [0.0.1. C. Lynch's Decision Not to Recuse after the Tarmac Meeting](#001-c-lynchs-decision-not-to-recuse-after-the-tarmac-meeting)
- [0.0.2. C. Reporting of Clinton-Related Emails to FBI NYO Supervisors](#002-c-reporting-of-clinton-related-emails-to-fbi-nyo-supervisors)
- [0.0.3. C. Toscas Asks McCabe About Weiner Laptop on October 24^[^160^](#fn160){#fnref160 .footnote-ref}^ {#c.-toscas-asks-mccabe-about-weiner-laptop-on-october-24}](#003-c-toscas-asks-mccabe-about-weiner-laptop-on-october-24^^160^fn160fnref160-footnote-ref^-c-toscas-asks-mccabe-about-weiner-laptop-on-october-24)
- [0.0.4. III. *Conclusion*](#004-iii-conclusion)

<!-- /TOC -->





![](Pictures/10000000000004C800000630A65BB39FFD1C572D.jpg)

![](Pictures/10000000000004C800000630AD664803FB9D7869.jpg)


Office of the Inspector General 
U.S.  Department of Justice OVERSIGHT *  INTEGRITY * GUIDANCE 
- A  Review of Various Actions by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and Department of Justice in Advance of the 2016 Election

- Oversight and  Review  Division  18-04

June  2018

Executive Summary

A Review of Various Actions by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and Department of Justice in Advance of the 2016 Election

- Decisions to enter into "letter use" or "Queen for a Day" immunity
    agreements with three witnesses;
- The use of consent agreements and "act of production" immunity to
    obtain the laptops used by Clinton's attorneys (Cheryl Mills and
    Heather Samuelson) to "cull" her personal and workrelated emails;
    and
- The handling of Clinton's interview on July 2, 2016.

With regard to these investigative decisions, we found, as detailed in
Chapter Five, that the Midyear team:

- Sought to obtain evidence whenever possible through consent but also
    used compulsory process, including grand jury subpoenas, search
    warrants, and 2703(d) orders (court orders for non-content email
    information) to obtain various evidence. We found that the
    prosecutors provided justifications for the preference for consent
    that were supported by Department and FBI policy and practice;
- Conducted voluntary witness interviews to obtain testimony,
    including from Clinton and her senior aides, and did not require any
    witnesses to testify before the grand jury. We found that one of the
    reasons for not using the grand jury for testimony involved concerns
    about exposing grand jurors to classified information;
- Did not seek to obtain every device, including those of Clinton's
    senior aides, or the contents of every email account through which a
    classified email may have traversed. We found that the reasons for
    not doing so were based on limitations the Midyear team imposed on
    the investigation's scope, the desire to complete the investigation
    well before the election, and the belief that the foregone evidence
    was likely of limited value. We further found that those reasons
    were, in part, in tension with Comey's response in October 2016 to
    the discovery of Clinton emails on the laptop of Anthony Weiner, the
    husband of Clinton's former Deputy Chief of Staff and personal
    assistant, Huma Abedin;
- Considered but did not seek permission from the Department to review
    certain highly classified materials that may have included
    information potentially relevant to the Midyear investigation. The
    classified appendix to this report describes in more detail the
    highly classified information, its potential relevance to

the Midyear investigation, the FBI's reasons for not seeking access to
it, and our analysis;

- Granted letter use immunity and/or "Queen for a Day" immunity to
    three witnesses in exchange for their testimony after considering,
    as provided for in Department policy, the value of the witness's
    testimony, the witness's relative culpability, and the possibility
    of a successful prosecution;
- Used consent agreements and "act of production" immunity to obtain
    the culling laptops used by Mills and Samuelson, in part to avoid
    the uncertainty and delays of a potential motion to quash any
    subpoenas or search warrants. We found that these decisions were
    occurring at a time when Comey and the Midyear team had already
    concluded that there was likely no prosecutable case and believed it
    was unlikely the culling laptops would change the outcome of the
    investigation;
- Asked Clinton what appeared to be appropriate questions and made use
    of documents to challenge Clinton's testimony and assess her
    credibility during her interview. We found that, by the date of her
    interview, the Midyear team and Comey had concluded that the
    evidence did not support criminal charges (absent a confession or
    false statement by Clinton during the interview), and that the
    interview had little effect on the outcome of the investigation; and
- Allowed Mills and Samuelson to attend the Clinton interview as
    Clinton's counsel, even though they also were fact witnesses,
    because the Midyear team determined that the only way to exclude
    them was to subpoena Clinton to testify before the grand jury, an
    option that we found was not seriously considered. We found no
    persuasive evidence that Mills's or Samuelson's presence influenced
    Clinton's interview. Nevertheless, we found the decision to allow
    them to attend the interview was inconsistent with typical
    investigative strategy.

For each of these decisions, we analyzed whether there was evidence of improper considerations, including bias, and also whether the justifications offered for the decision were a pretext for improper, but
 unstated, considerations
The question we considered was not whether a particular investigative
decision was the ideal choice or one that could have been handled more
effectively, but whether the circumstances surrounding the decision
indicated that it was based on considerations other than the merits of
the investigation. If a choice made by the investigative team was among
two or more reasonable alternatives, we did not find that it was
improper even if we believed that an alternative decision would have
been more effective.

Thus, a determination by the OIG that a decision was not unreasonable
does not mean that the OIG has endorsed the decision or concluded that
the decision was the most effective among the options considered. We
took this approach because our role as an OIG is not to second-guess
valid discretionary judgments made during the course of an
investigation, and this approach is consistent with the OIG's handling
of such questions in past reviews.

In undertaking our analysis, our task was made significantly more
difficult because of text and instant messages exchanged on FBI devices
and systems by five FBI employees involved in the Midyear investigation.
These messages reflected political opinions in support of former
Secretary Clinton and against her then political opponent, Donald Trump.
Some of these text messages and instant messages mixed political
commentary with discussions about the Midyear investigation, and raised
concerns that political bias may have impacted investigative decisions.

In particular, we were concerned about text messages exchanged by FBI
Deputy Assistant Director Peter Strzok and Lisa Page, Special Counsel to
the Deputy Director, that potentially indicated or created the
appearance that investigative decisions were impacted by bias or
improper considerations. As we describe in Chapter Twelve of our report,
most of the text messages raising such questions pertained to the Russia
investigation, which was not a part of this review. Nonetheless, the
suggestion in certain Russiarelated text messages in August 2016 that
Strzok might be willing to take official action to impact presidential
candidate Trump's electoral prospects caused us to question the earlier
Midyear investigative decisions in which Strzok was involved, and
whether he took specific actions in the Midyear investigation based on
his political views. As we describe Chapter Five of our report, we found
that Strzok was not the sole decisionmaker for any of the specific
Midyear investigative decisions we examined in that chapter. We further
found evidence that in some instances Strzok and Page advocated for more
aggressive investigative measures in the Midyear investigation, such as
the use of grand jury subpoenas and search warrants to obtain evidence.

There were clearly tensions and disagreements in a number of important
areas between Midyear agents and prosecutors. However, we did not find
documentary or testimonial evidence that improper considerations,
including political bias, directly affected the specific investigative
decisions we reviewed in Chapter Five, or that the justifications
offered for these decisions were pretextual.

Nonetheless, these messages cast a cloud over the FBI's handling of the
Midyear investigation and the investigation's credibility. But our
review did not find evidence to connect the political views expressed in
these messages to the specific investigative decisions that we reviewed;
rather, consistent with the analytic approach described above, we found
that these specific decisions were the result of discretionary judgments
made during the course of an investigation by the Midyear agents and
prosecutors and that these judgment calls were not unreasonable. The
broader impact of these text and instant messages, including on such
matters as the public perception of the FBI and the Midyear
investigation, are discussed in Chapter Twelve of our report.

Comey's Public Statement on July 5
==================================

*"Endgame" Discussions*

As we describe in Chapter Six of the report, by the Spring of 2016,
Comey and the Midyear team had determined that, absent an unexpected
development, evidence to support a criminal prosecution of Clinton was
lacking. Midyear team members told us that they based this assessment on
a lack of evidence showing intent to place classified information on the
server, or knowledge that the information was classified. We describe
the factors that the Department took into account in its decision to
decline prosecution in Chapter Seven of our report and below.

Comey told the OIG that as he began to realize the investigation was
likely to result in a declination, he began to think of ways to credibly
announce its closing.

Comey engaged then DAG Yates in discussions in April 2016 about the
"endgame" for the Midyear investigation. Comey said that he encouraged
Yates to consider the most transparent options for announcing a
declination. Yates told the OIG that, as a result of her discussions
with Comey, she thought the Department and FBI would jointly announce
any declination.

Comey said he also told Yates that the closer they got to the political
conventions, the more likely he would be to insist that a special
counsel be appointed, because he did not believe the Department could
credibly announce the closing of the investigation once Clinton was the
Democratic Party nominee. However, we did not find evidence that Comey
ever seriously considered requesting a special counsel; instead, he used
the reference to a special counsel as an effort to induce the Department
to move more quickly to obtain the Mills and Samuelson culling laptops
and to complete the investigation.

Although Comey engaged with the Department in these "endgame"
discussions, he told us that he was concerned that involvement by then
AG Loretta Lynch in a declination announcement would result in
"corrosive doubt" about whether the decision was objective and impartial
because Lynch was appointed by a President from the same political party
as Clinton. Comey cited other factors to us that he said caused him to
be concerned by early May 2016 that Lynch could not credibly participate
in announcing a declination:

- An alleged instruction from Lynch at a meeting in September 2015 to
    call the Midyear investigation a "matter" in statements to the media
    and Congress, which we describe in Chapter Four of our report;
- Statements made by then President Barack Obama about the Midyear
    investigation, which also are discussed in Chapter Four; and
- Concerns that certain classified information mentioning Lynch would
    leak, which we describe in Chapter Six and in the classified
    appendix.

As we discuss below and in Chapter Six of our report, the meeting
between Lynch and former President Clinton on June 27, 2016 also played
a role in Comey's decision to deliver a unilateral statement.

Comey did not raise any of these concerns with Lynch or Yates. Rather,
unbeknownst to them, Comey began considering the possibility of an
FBI-only public statement in late April and early May 2016. Comey told
the OIG that a separate public statement was warranted by the "500-year
flood" in which the FBI found itself, and that he weighed the need to
preserve the credibility and integrity of the Department and the FBI,
and the need to protect "a sense of justice more broadly in the
country---that things are fair not fixed, and they're done
independently."

*Comey's Draft Statement*

Comey's initial draft statement, which he shared with FBI senior
leadership on May 2, criticized Clinton's handling of classified
information as "grossly negligent," but concluded that "no reasonable
prosecutor" would bring a case based on the facts developed in the
Midyear investigation. Over the course of the next 2 months, Comey's
draft statement underwent various language changes, including the
following:

- The description of Clinton's handling of classified information was
    changed from "grossly negligent" to "extremely careless;"
- A statement that the sheer volume of information classified as
    Secret supported an inference of gross negligence was removed and
    replaced with a statement that the classified information they
    discovered was "especially concerning because all of these emails
    were housed on servers not supported by full-time staff";
- A statement that the FBI assessed that it was "reasonably likely"
    that hostile actors gained access to Clinton's private email server
    was changed to "possible." The statement also acknowledged that the
    FBI investigation and its forensic analysis did not find evidence
    that Clinton's email server systems were compromised; and
- A paragraph summarizing the factors that led the FBI to assess that
    it was possible that hostile actors accessed Clinton's server was
    added, and at one point referenced Clinton's use of her private
    email for an exchange with then President Obama while in the
    territory of a foreign adversary. This reference later was changed
    to "another senior government official," and ultimately was omitted.

Each version of the statement criticized Clinton's handling of
classified information. Comey told us that he included criticism of
former Secretary Clinton's uncharged conduct because "unusual
transparency...was necessary for an unprecedented situation," and that
such transparency "was the best chance we had of having the American
people have confidence that the justice system works."

Other witnesses told the OIG that Comey included this criticism to avoid creating the appearance that the FBI was "letting Clinton off the hook," as well as to "message" the decision to the FBI workforce to
emphasize that employees would be disciplined for similar conduct and to
distinguish the Clinton investigation from the cases of other public
figures who had been prosecuted for mishandling violations.

*The Tarmac Meeting and Impact on Comey's Statement*

On June 27, 2016, Lynch met with former President Clinton on Lynch's
plane, which was parked on the tarmac at a Phoenix airport. This meeting
was unplanned, and Lynch's staff told the OIG they received no notice
that former President Clinton planned to board Lynch's plane. Both Lynch
and former President Clinton told the OIG that they did not discuss the
Midyear investigation or any other Department investigation during their
conversation. Chapter Six of our report describes their testimony about
the substance of their discussion.

Lynch told the OIG that she became increasingly concerned as the meeting
"went on and on," and stated "that it was just too long a conversation
to have had." Following this meeting, Lynch obtained an ethics opinion
from the Departmental Ethics Office that she was not required to recuse
herself from the Midyear investigation, and she decided not to
voluntarily recuse herself either. In making this decision, Lynch told
the OIG that stepping aside would create a misimpression that she and
former President Clinton had discussed inappropriate topics, or that her
role in the Midyear investigation somehow was greater than it was.

On July 1, during an interview with a reporter, Lynch stated that she
was not recusing from the Midyear investigation, but that she "fully
expected" to accept the recommendation of the career agents and
prosecutors who conducted the investigation, "as is the common process."
Then, in a follow up question, Lynch said "I'll be briefed on the
findings and I will be accepting their recommendations." Lynch's
statements created considerable public confusion about the status of her
continuing involvement in the Midyear investigation.

Although we found no evidence that Lynch and former President Clinton
discussed the Midyear investigation or engaged in other inappropriate
discussion during their tarmac meeting, we also found that Lynch's
failure to recognize the appearance problem created by former President
Clinton's visit and to take action to cut the visit short was an error
in judgment. We further concluded that her efforts to respond to the
meeting by explaining what her role would be in the investigation going
forward created public confusion and did not adequately address the
situation.

Comey told the OIG that he was "90 percent there, like highly likely" to
make a separate public statement prior to the tarmac meeting, but that
the tarmac meeting "tipped the scales" toward making his mind up to go
forward with his own public statement.

*Comey's Decision Not to Tell Department Leadership*

Comey acknowledged that he made a conscious decision not to tell
Department leadership about his plans to make a separate statement
because he was concerned that they would instruct him not to do it. He
also acknowledged that he made this decision when he first conceived of
the idea to do the statement, even as he continued to engage the
Department in discussions about the "endgame" for the investigation.

Comey admitted that he concealed his intentions from the Department
until the morning of his press conference on July 5, and instructed his
staff to do the same, to make it impracticable for Department leadership
to prevent him from delivering his statement. We found that it was
extraordinary and insubordinate for Comey to do so, and we found none of
his reasons to be a persuasive basis for deviating from well-established
Department policies in a way intentionally designed to avoid supervision
by Department leadership over his actions.

On the morning of July 5, 2016, Comey contacted Lynch and Yates about
his plans to make a public statement, but did so only after the FBI had
notified the press---in fact, the Department first learned about Comey's
press conference from a media inquiry, rather than from the FBI. When
Comey did call Lynch that morning, he told her that he was not going to
inform her about the substance of his planned press statement.

While Lynch asked Comey what the subject matter of the statement was
going to be (Comey told her in response it would be about the Midyear
investigation), she did not ask him to tell her what he intended to say
about the Midyear investigation. We found that Lynch, having decided not
to recuse herself, retained authority over both the final prosecution
decision and the Department's management of the Midyear investigation.

As such, we believe she should have instructed Comey

to tell her what he intended to say beforehand, and should have
discussed it with Comey.

Comey's public statement announced that the FBI had completed its
Midyear investigation, criticized Clinton and her senior aides as
"extremely careless" in their handling of classified information, stated
that the FBI was recommending that the Department decline prosecution of
Clinton, and asserted that "no reasonable prosecutor" would prosecute
Clinton based on the facts developed by the FBI during its
investigation. We determined that Comey's decision to make this
statement was the result of his belief that only he had the ability to
credibly and authoritatively convey the rationale for the decision to
not seek charges against Clinton, and that he needed to hold the press
conference to protect the FBI and the Department from the extraordinary
harm that he believed would have resulted had he failed to do so. While
we found no evidence that Comey's statement was the result of bias or an
effort to influence the election, we did not find his justifications for
issuing the statement to be reasonable or persuasive.

We concluded that Comey's unilateral announcement was inconsistent with
Department policy and violated long-standing Department practice and
protocol by, among other things, criticizing Clinton's uncharged
conduct. We also found that Comey usurped the authority of the Attorney
General, and inadequately and incompletely described the legal position
of Department prosecutors.

The Department's Declination Decision on July 6
===============================================

Following Comey's public statement on July 5, the Midyear prosecutors
finalized their recommendation that the Department decline prosecution
of Clinton, her senior aides, and the senders of emails determined to
contain classified information. On July 6, the Midyear prosecutors
briefed Lynch, Yates, Comey, other members of Department and FBI
leadership, and FBI Midyear team members about the basis for the
declination recommendation. Lynch subsequently issued a short public
statement that she met with the career prosecutors and agents who
conducted the investigation and "received and accepted their unanimous
recommendation" that the investigation be closed without charges.

We found that the prosecutors considered five federal statutes:

- 18 U.S.C. §§ 793(d) and (e) (willful mishandling of documents or
    information relating to the national defense);
- 18 U.S.C. § 793(f) (removal, loss, theft, abstraction, or
    destruction of documents or information relating to the national
    defense through gross negligence, or failure to report such removal,
    loss, theft, abstraction, or destruction);
- 18 U.S.C. § 1924 (unauthorized removal and retention of classified
    documents or material by government employees); and
- 18 U.S.C. § 2071 (concealment, removal, or mutilation of government
    records).

As described in Chapter Seven of our report, the prosecutors concluded
that the evidence did not support prosecution under any of these
statutes for various reasons, including that former Secretary Clinton
and her senior aides lacked the intent to communicate classified
information on unclassified systems. Critical to their conclusion was
that the emails in question lacked proper classification markings, that
the senders often refrained from using specific classified facts or
terms in emails and worded emails carefully in an attempt to "talk
around" classified information, that the emails were sent to other
government officials in furtherance of their official duties, and that
former Secretary Clinton relied on the judgment of State Department
employees to properly handle classified information, among other facts.

We further found that the statute that required the most complex
analysis by the prosecutors was Section 793(f)(1), the "gross
negligence" provision that has been the focus of much of the criticism
of the declination decision. As we describe in Chapters Two and Seven of
our report, the prosecutors analyzed the legislative history of Section
793(f)(1), relevant case law, and the Department's prior interpretation
of the statute. They concluded that Section 793(f)(1) likely required a
state of mind that was "so gross as to almost suggest deliberate
intention," criminally reckless, or "something that falls just short of
being willful," as well as evidence that the individuals who sent emails
containing classified information "knowingly" included or transferred
such information onto unclassified systems.

The Midyear team concluded that such proof was lacking. We found that
this interpretation of Section 793(f)(1) was consistent with the
Department's historical approach in prior cases under different
leadership, including in the 2008 decision not to prosecute former
Attorney General Alberto Gonzales for mishandling classified documents.

We analyzed the Department's declination decision according to the same
analytical standard that we applied to other decisions made during the
investigation. We did not substitute the OIG's judgment for the
judgments made by the Department, but rather sought to determine whether
the decision was based on improper considerations, including political
bias. We found no evidence that the conclusions by the prosecutors were
affected by bias or other improper considerations; rather, we determined
that they were based on the prosecutors' assessment of the facts, the
law, and past Department practice.

We therefore concluded that these were legal and policy judgments
involving core prosecutorial discretion that were for the Department to
make.

Discovery in September 2016 of Emails on the Weiner Laptop
==========================================================

*Discovery of Emails by the FBI's New York Field Office*

In September 2016, the FBI's New York Field Office

(NYO) and the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern

District of New York (SDNY) began investigating former Congressman
Anthony Weiner for his online relationship with a minor. A federal
search warrant was obtained on September 26, 2016, for Weiner's iPhone,
iPad, and laptop computer. The FBI obtained these devices the same day.
The search warrant authorized the government to search for evidence
relating to the following crimes: transmitting obscene material to a
minor, sexual exploitation of children, and activities related to child
pornography.

The Weiner case agent told the OIG that he began processing Weiner's
devices on September 26, and that he noticed "within hours" that there
were "over 300,000 emails on the laptop." He said that either that
evening or the next morning, he saw at least one BlackBerry PIN message
between Clinton and Abedin, as well as emails between them. He said that
he recalled seeing emails associated with "about seven domains," such as
yahoo.com, state.gov, clintonfoundation.org, clintonemail.com, and
hillaryclinton.com. The case agent immediately notified his NYO chain of
command, and the information was ultimately briefed to NYO Assistant
Director in Charge (ADIC) William Sweeney on September 28.

*Reporting of Emails to FBI Headquarters*

As we describe in Chapter Nine of our report, Sweeney took the following
steps to notify FBI Headquarters about the discovery of Midyear-related
emails on the Weiner laptop:

- On September 28, during a secure video teleconference (SVTC),
    Sweeney reported that Weiner investigation agents had discovered
    141,000 emails on Weiner's laptop that were potentially relevant to
    the Midyear investigation. The OIG determined that this SVTC was led
    by then Deputy Director Andrew McCabe, and that approximately 39
    senior FBI executives likely would have participated. Comey was not
    present for the SVTC.
- Sweeney said he spoke again with McCabe on the evening of
    September 28. Sweeney said that during this call he informed McCabe
    that NYO personnel had continued processing the laptop and that they
    had now identified 347,000 emails on the laptop.
- Sweeney said he also called two FBI Executive Assistant Directors
    (EAD) on September 28 and informed them that the Weiner case team
    had discovered emails relevant to the Midyear investigation. One of
    the EADs told the OIG that he then called McCabe, and that McCabe
    told the EAD that he was aware of the emails. The EAD told us that
    "There was no doubt in my mind when we finished that
    conversation that McCabe understood the, the gravity of what the
    find was."
- Sweeney said he also spoke to FBI Assistant Director E.W. "Bill"
    Priestap on September 28 and 29, 2016. Emails indicate that during
    their conversation on September 29, they discussed the limited scope
    of the Weiner search warrant (*i.e.*, the need to obtain additional
    legal process to review any Midyear-related email on the Weiner
    laptop).

*Initial Response of FBI Headquarters*

McCabe told the OIG that he considered the information provided by
Sweeney to be "a big deal" and said he instructed Priestap to send a
team to New York to review the emails on the Weiner laptop. McCabe told
the OIG that he recalled talking to Comey about the issue "right around
the time McCabe found out about it." McCabe described it as a
"fly-by," where the Weiner laptop was "like one in a list of things that
we discussed."

Comey said that he recalled first learning about the additional emails
on the Weiner laptop at some point in early October 2016, although he
said it was possible this could have occurred in late September 2016.
Comey told the OIG that this information "didn't index" with him, which
he attributed to the way the information was presented to him and the
fact that, "I don't know that I knew that Weiner was married to Huma
Abedin at the time."

Text messages of FBI Deputy Assistant Director Peter Strzok indicated
that he, McCabe, and Priestap discussed the Weiner laptop on September
1.  Strzok said that he had initially planned to send a team to New York
to review the emails, but a conference call with NYO was scheduled
instead. The conference call took place on September 29, and five
members of the FBI Midyear team participated. Notes from the conference
call indicate the participants discussed the presence of a large volume
of emails (350,000) on the Weiner laptop and specific domain names,
including clintonemail.com and state.gov. The Midyear SSA said that NYO
also mentioned seeing BlackBerry domain emails on the Weiner laptop.

Additional discussions took place on October 3 and 4, 2016. However,
after October 4, we found no evidence that anyone associated with the
Midyear investigation, including the entire leadership team at FBI
Headquarters, took any action on the Weiner laptop issue until the week
of October 24, and then did so only after the Weiner case agent
expressed concerns to SDNY, prompting SDNY to contact the Office of the
Deputy Attorney General (ODAG) on October 21 to raise concerns about the
lack of action.

*Reengagement of FBI Headquarters*

On Friday, October 21, SDNY Deputy U.S. Attorney Joon

Kim contacted ODAG and was put in touch with DAAG George Toscas, the
most senior career Department official involved in the Midyear
investigation. Thereafter, at Toscas's request, one of the Midyear
prosecutors called Strzok. This was the first conversation that the FBI
had with Midyear prosecutors about the Weiner laptop.

Toscas said he asked McCabe about the Weiner laptop on Monday, October
24, after a routine meeting between FBI and Department leadership.
McCabe told us that this interaction with Toscas caused him to follow up
with the FBI Midyear team about the Weiner laptop and to call McCord
about the issue.

On October 26, NYO, SDNY, and Midyear team members participated in a
conference call. The FBI Midyear team told the OIG that they learned
important new information on this call, specifically: (1) that there was
a large volume of emails on the Weiner laptop, particularly the
potential for a large number of \@clintonemail.com emails; and (2) that
the presence of Blackberry data indicated that emails from Clinton's
first three months as Secretary of State could be present on the laptop.
However, as we describe above and in Chapter Nine of our report, these
basic facts were known to the FBI by September 29, 2016.

The FBI Midyear team briefed McCabe about the information from the
conference call on the evening of October 26, 2016. McCabe told us that
he felt the situation was "absolutely urgent" and proposed that the FBI
Midyear team meet with Comey the following day.

On October 27 at 5:20 a.m., McCabe emailed Comey stating that the
Midyear team "has come across some additional actions they believe they
need to take," and recommending that they meet that day to discuss the
implications "if you have any space on your calendar." Comey stated that
he did not know what this email was about when he received it and did
not initially recall that he had been previously notified about the
Weiner laptop.

We found that, by no later than September 29, FBI executives and the FBI
Midyear team had learned virtually every fact that was cited by the FBI
in late October as justification for obtaining the search warrant for
the Weiner laptop, including that the laptop contained:

- Over 340,000 emails, some of which were from domains associated with
    Clinton, including state.gov, clintonfoundation.org,
    clintonemail.com, and hillaryclinton.com;
- Numerous emails between Clinton and Abedin;
- An unknown number of Blackberry communications on the laptop,
    including one or more messages between Clinton and Abedin,
    indicating the possibility that the laptop contained communications
    from the early months of Clinton's tenure; and
- Emails dated beginning in 2007 and covering the entire period of
    Clinton's tenure as Secretary of State.

As we describe in Chapter Nine of our report, the explanations we were
given for the FBI's failure to take immediate action on the Weiner
laptop fell into four general categories:

- The FBI Midyear team was waiting for additional information about
    the contents of the laptop from NYO, which was not provided until
    late October;
- The FBI Midyear team could not review the emails without additional
    legal authority, such as consent or a new search warrant;
- The FBI Midyear team and senior FBI officials did not believe that
    the information on the laptop was likely to be significant; and
- Key members of the FBI Midyear team had been reassigned to the
    investigation of Russian interference in the U.S. election, which
    was a higher priority.

We found these explanations to be unpersuasive justifications for not
acting sooner, given the FBI leadership's conclusion about the
importance of the information and that the FBI Midyear team had
sufficient information to take action in early October and knew at that
time that it would need a new search warrant to review any
Clinton-Abedin emails. Moreover, given the FBI's extensive resources,
the fact that Strzok and several other FBI members of the Midyear team
had been assigned to the Russia investigation, which was extremely
active during this September and October time period, was not an excuse
for failing to take any action during this time period on the Weiner
laptop.

The FBI's failure to act in late September or early October is even less
justifiable when contrasted with the attention and resources that FBI
management and some members of the Midyear team dedicated to other
activities in connection with the Midyear investigation during the same
period. As detailed in Chapter Eight, these activities included:

- The preparation of Comey's speech at the FBI's SAC Conference on
    October 12, a speech designed to help equip SACs to "bat down"
    misinformation about the July 5 declination decision;
- The preparation and distribution of detailed talking points to FBI
    SACs in mid-October in order, again, "to equip people who are going
    to be talking about it anyway with the actual facts

and the FBI's actual perspective on the declination"; and

- A briefing for retired FBI agents conducted on October 21 to
    describe the investigative decisions made during Midyear so as to
    arm former employees with facts so that they, too, might counter
    "falsehoods and exaggerations."

In assessing the decision to prioritize the Russia investigation over
following up on the Midyear-related investigative lead discovered on the
Weiner laptop, we were particularly concerned about text messages sent
by Strzok and Page that potentially indicated or created the appearance
that investigative decisions they made were impacted by bias or improper
considerations. Most of the text messages raising such questions
pertained to the Russia investigation, and the implication in some of
these text messages, particularly Strzok's August 8 text message ("we'll
stop" candidate Trump from being elected), was that Strzok might be
willing to take official action to impact a presidential candidate's
electoral prospects. Under these circumstances, we did not have
confidence that Strzok's decision to prioritize the Russia investigation
over following up on the Midyear-related investigative lead discovered
on the Weiner laptop was free from bias.

We searched for evidence that the Weiner laptop was deliberately placed
on the back-burner by others in the FBI to protect Clinton, but found no
evidence in emails, text messages, instant messages, or documents that
suggested an improper purpose. We also took note of the fact that
numerous other FBI executives---including the approximately 39 who
participated in the September 28 SVTC---were briefed on the potential
existence of Midyear-related emails on the Weiner laptop. We also noted
that the Russia investigation was under the supervision of
Priestap---for whom we found no evidence of bias and who himself was
aware of the Weiner laptop issue by September 29. However, we also did
not identify a consistent or persuasive explanation for the FBI's
failure to act for almost a month after learning of potential
Midyear-related emails on the Weiner laptop.

The FBI's inaction had potentially far-reaching consequences. Comey told
the OIG that, had he known about the laptop in the beginning of October
and thought the email review could have been completed before the
election, it may have affected his decision to notify Congress. Comey
told the OIG, "I don't know if it would have put us in a different
place, but I would have wanted to have the opportunity."

Comey's Decision to Notify Congress on October 28
=================================================

Following the briefing from the FBI Midyear team on October 27, 2016,
Comey authorized the Midyear team to seek a search warrant, telling the
OIG that "the volume of emails" and the presence of BlackBerry emails on
the Weiner laptop were "two highly significant facts." As we describe in
Chapter Thirteen of our report, McCabe joined this meeting by phone but
was asked not to participate, and subsequently recused himself from the
Midyear investigation on November 1, 2016.

The issue of notifying Congress of the Weiner laptop development was
first raised at the October 27 briefing and, over the course of the next
24 hours, numerous additional discussions occurred within the FBI. As we
describe in Chapter Ten of our report, the factors considered during
those discussions included:

- Comey's belief that failure to disclose the existence of the emails
    would be an act of concealment;
- The belief that Comey had an obligation to update Congress because
    the discovery was potentially significant and made his prior
    testimony that the investigation was closed no longer true;
- An implicit assumption that Clinton would be elected President;
- Fear that the information would leak if the FBI failed to disclose
    it;
- Concern that failing to disclose would result in accusations that
    the FBI had "engineered a cover up" to help Clinton get elected;
- Concerns about protecting the reputation of the FBI;
- Concerns about the perceived illegitimacy of a Clinton presidency
    that would follow from a failure to disclose the discovery of the
    emails if they proved to be significant;
- Concerns about the electoral impact of any announcement; and
- The belief that the email review could not be completed before the
    election.

As a result of these discussions on October 27, Comey decided to notify
Congress about the discovery of Midyear-related emails on the Weiner
laptop. Comey told us that, although he "believed very strongly that
our rule should be, we don't comment on pending investigations" and that
it was a "very important norm" for the Department to avoid taking
actions that could impact an imminent election, he felt he had an
obligation to update Congress because the email discovery was
potentially very significant and it made his prior testimony no longer
true.

We found no evidence that Comey's decision to send the October 28 letter
was influenced by political preferences. Instead, we found that his
decision was the result of several interrelated factors that were
connected to his concern that failing to send the letter would harm the
FBI and his ability to lead it, and his view that candidate Clinton was
going to win the presidency and that she would be perceived to be an
illegitimate president if the public first learned of the information
after the election. Although Comey told us that he "didn't make this
decision because he thought it would leak otherwise," several FBI
officials told us that the concern about leaks played a role in the
decision.

Much like with his July 5 announcement, we found that in making this
decision, Comey engaged in ad hoc decisionmaking based on his personal
views even if it meant rejecting longstanding Department policy or
practice. We found unpersuasive Comey's explanation as to why
transparency was more important than Department policy and practice with
regard to the reactivated Midyear investigation while, by contrast,
Department policy and practice were more important to follow with regard
to the Clinton Foundation and Russia investigations.

Comey's description of his choice as being between

"two doors," one labeled "speak" and one labeled "conceal," was a false
dichotomy. The two doors were actually labeled "follow policy/practice"
and "depart from policy/practice." Although we acknowledge that Comey
faced a difficult situation with unattractive choices, in proceeding as
he did, we concluded that Comey made a serious error of judgment.

*Department and FBI Leadership Discussions*

On October 27, Comey instructed his Chief of Staff, James Rybicki, to
reach out to the Department about his plan to notify Congress. As we
describe in Chapter Ten of our report, Comey told the OIG that he
decided to ask Rybicki to inform the Department rather than to contact
Lynch or Yates directly because he did not "want to jam them and I
wanted to offer them the opportunity to think about and decide whether
they wanted to be engaged on it." Rybicki and Axelrod spoke on the
afternoon of October 27 and had "a series of phone calls" the rest of
the day. Rybicki told Axelrod that Comey believed he had an obligation
to notify Congress about the laptop in order to correct a misimpression
that the Midyear investigation was closed.

Lynch, Yates, Axelrod, and their staffs had several discussions that
same day as to whether Lynch or Yates should call Comey directly, but
said they ultimately decided to have Axelrod communicate "the strong
view that neither the DAG nor AG felt this letter should go out."
Yates told us they were concerned that direct contact with Comey would
be perceived as "strongarming" him, and that based on her experience
with Comey, he was likely to "push back hard" against input from Lynch
or her, especially if accepting their input meant that he had to go back
to his staff and explain that he was reversing his decision. She said
that she viewed Rybicki as the person they needed to convince if they
wanted to change Comey's mind. Accordingly, Axelrod informed Rybicki on
October 27 of the Department's strong opposition to Comey's plan to send
a letter.

Rybicki reported to Comey that the Department "recommended against"
the Congressional notification and thought it was "a bad idea." Although
Comey told us that he would not have sent the letter if Lynch or Yates
had told him not to do so, he said he viewed their response as only a
recommendation and interpreted their lack of direct engagement as saying
"basically.it's up to you.. I honestly thought they were taking
kind of a cowardly way out." The following day, October 28, Comey sent a
letter to Congress stating, in part, that "the FBI has learned of the
existence of emails that appear to be pertinent to the Midyear
investigation."

Comey, Lynch, and Yates faced difficult choices in late

October 2016. However, we found it extraordinary that Comey assessed
that it was best that the FBI Director not speak directly with the
Attorney General and Deputy Attorney General about how best to navigate
this most important decision and mitigate the resulting harms, and that
Comey's decision resulted in the Attorney General and Deputy Attorney
General concluding that it would be counterproductive to speak directly
with the FBI Director. We believe that open and candid communication
among leaders in the Department and its components is essential for the
effective functioning of the Department.

**Text and Instant Messages, Use of**

**Personal Email, and Alleged Improper**

Disclosures of Non-Public Information
=====================================

*Text Messages and Instant Messages*

As we describe in Chapter Twelve, during our review we identified text
messages and instant messages sent on FBI mobile devices or computer
systems by five FBI employees who were assigned to the Midyear
investigation. These included:

- Text messages exchanged between Strzok and Page;
- Instant messages exchanged between Agent 1, who was one of the four
    Midyear case agents, and Agent 5, who was a member of the filter
    team; and
- Instant messages sent by FBI Attorney 2, who was assigned to the
    Midyear investigation.

The text messages and instant messages sent by these employees included
statements of hostility toward then candidate Trump and statements of
support for candidate Clinton, and several appeared to mix political
opinions with discussions about the Midyear investigation.

We found that the conduct of these five FBI employees brought discredit
to themselves, sowed doubt about the FBI's handling of the Midyear
investigation, and impacted the reputation of the FBI. Although our
review did not find documentary or testimonial evidence directly
connecting the political views these employees expressed in their text
messages and instant messages to the specific investigative decisions we
reviewed in Chapter Five, the conduct by these employees cast a cloud
over the FBI Midyear investigation and sowed doubt the FBI's work on,
and its handling of, the Midyear investigation. Moreover, the damage
caused by their actions extends far beyond the scope of the Midyear
investigation and goes to the heart of the FBI's reputation for neutral
factfinding and political independence.

We were deeply troubled by text messages exchanged between Strzok and
Page that potentially indicated or created the appearance that
investigative decisions were impacted by bias or improper
considerations. Most of the text messages raising such questions
pertained to the Russia investigation, which was not a part of this
review. Nonetheless, when one senior FBI official, Strzok, who was
helping to lead the Russia investigation at the time, conveys in a text
message to another senior FBI official, Page, "No. No he won't. We'll
stop it" in response to her question "Trump's not ever going to
become president, right? Right?!", it is not only indicative of a biased
state of mind but, even more seriously, implies a willingness to take
official action to impact the presidential candidate's electoral
prospects. This is antithetical to the core values of the FBI and the
Department of Justice.

We do not question that the FBI employees who sent these messages are
entitled to their own political views. However, we believe using FBI
devices to send the messages discussed in Chapter Twelve---particularly
the messages that intermix work-related discussions with political
commentary---potentially implicate provisions in the FBI's Offense Code
and Penalty Guidelines. At a minimum, we found that the employees' use
of FBI systems and devices to send the identified messages demonstrated
extremely poor judgment and a gross lack of professionalism. We
therefore refer this information to the FBI for its handling and
consideration of whether the messages sent by the five employees listed
above violated the FBI's Offense Code of Conduct.

*Use of Personal Email*

As we also describe in Chapter Twelve, we learned during the course of
our review that Comey, Strzok, and Page used their personal email
accounts to conduct FBI business.

We identified numerous instances in which Comey used a personal email
account to conduct unclassified FBI business. We found that, given the
absence of exigent circumstances and the frequency with which the use of
personal email occurred, Comey's use of a personal email account for
unclassified FBI business to be inconsistent with Department policy.

We found that Strzok used his personal email accounts for official
government business on several occasions, including forwarding an email
from his FBI account to his personal email account about the proposed
search warrant the Midyear team was seeking on the Weiner laptop. This
email included a draft of the search warrant affidavit, which contained
information from the Weiner investigation that appears to have been
under seal at the time in the Southern District of New York and
information obtained pursuant to a grand jury subpoena issued in the
Eastern District of Virginia in the Midyear investigation. We refer to
the FBI the issue of whether Strzok's use of personal email accounts
violated FBI and Department policies.

Finally, when questioned, Page also told us she used personal email for
work-related matters at times. She stated that she and Strzok sometimes
used these forums for work-related discussions due to the technical
limitations of FBI-issued phones. Page left the FBI on May 4, 2018.

*Improper Disclosure of Non-Public Information*

As we also describe in Chapter Twelve, among the issues we reviewed were
allegations that Department and FBI employees improperly disclosed
non-public information regarding the Midyear investigation. Although FBI
policy strictly limits the employees who are authorized to speak to the
media, we found that this policy appeared to be widely ignored during
the period we reviewed.

We identified numerous FBI employees, at all levels of the organization
and with no official reason to be in contact with the media, who were
nevertheless in frequent contact with reporters. Attached to this report
as Attachments E and F are two link charts that reflect the volume of
communications that we identified between FBI employees and media
representatives in April/May and October 2016. We have profound concerns
about the volume and extent of unauthorized media contacts by FBI
personnel that we have uncovered during our review.

In addition, we identified instances where FBI employees improperly
received benefits from reporters, including tickets to sporting events,
golfing outings, drinks and meals, and admittance to nonpublic social
events. We will separately report on those investigations as they are
concluded, consistent with the Inspector General Act, other applicable
federal statutes, and OIG policy.

The harm caused by leaks, fear of potential leaks, and a culture of
unauthorized media contacts is illustrated in Chapters Ten and Eleven of
our report, where we detail the fact that these issues influenced FBI
officials who were advising Comey on consequential investigative
decisions in October 2016. The FBI updated its media policy in November
2017, restating its strict guidelines concerning media contacts, and
identifying who is required to obtain authority before engaging members
of the media, and when and where to report media contact. We do not
believe the problem is with the FBI's policy, which we found to be clear
and unambiguous. Rather, we concluded that these leaks highlight the
need to change what appears to be a cultural attitude among many in the
organization.

Recusal Issues
==============

**Former Deputy Director Andrew McCabe:** As we describe in Chapter
Thirteen, in 2015, McCabe's spouse, Dr. Jill McCabe, ran for a Virginia
State Senate seat. During the campaign, Dr. McCabe's campaign committee
received substantial monetary and in-kind contributions, totaling
\$675,288 or approximately 40 percent of the total contributions raised
by Dr. McCabe for her state senate campaign, from then Governor
McAuliffe's Political Action Committee (PAC) and from the Virginia
Democratic Party. In addition, on June 26, 2015, Hillary Clinton was the
featured speaker at a fundraiser in Virginia hosted by the Virginia
Democratic Party and attended by Governor McAuliffe.

At the time his wife sought to run for state senate,

McCabe was the Assistant Director in Charge of the FBI's Washington
Field Office (WFO) and sought ethics advice from FBI ethics officials
and attorneys. We found that FBI ethics officials and attorneys did not
fully appreciate the potential significant implications to McCabe and
the FBI from campaign donations to Dr. McCabe's campaign. The FBI did
not implement any review of campaign donations to assess potential
conflicts or appearance issues that could arise from the donations. On
this issue, we believe McCabe did what he was supposed to do by
notifying those responsible in the FBI for ethics issues and seeking
their guidance.

After McCabe became FBI Deputy Director in February 2016, McCabe had an
active role in the supervision of the Midyear investigation, and
oversight of the Clinton Foundation investigation, until he recused
himself from these investigations on November 1, 2016. McCabe
voluntarily recused himself on November 1, at Comey's urging, as the
result of an October 23 article in the Wall Street Journal identifying
the substantial donations from McAuliffe's PAC and the Virginia
Democratic Party to Dr. McCabe.

With respect to these investigations, we agreed with the FBI's chief
ethics official that McCabe was not at any time required to recuse under
the relevant authorities. However, voluntary recusal is always
permissible with the approval of a supervisor or ethics official, which
is what McCabe did on November 1. Had the FBI put in place a system for
reviewing campaign donations to Dr. McCabe, which were public under
Virginia law, the sizable donations from McAuliffe's PAC and the
Virginia Democratic Party may have triggered prior consideration of the
very appearance concerns raised in the October 23 WSJ article. Finally,
we also found that McCabe did not fully comply with this recusal in a
few instances related to the Clinton Foundation investigation.

**Former Assistant Attorney General Peter Kadzik:** In Chapter Fourteen,
we found that Kadzik demonstrated poor judgment by failing to recuse
himself from Clinton-related matters under federal ethics regulations
prior to November 2, 2016. Kadzik did not recognize the appearance of a
conflict that he created when he initiated an effort to obtain
employment for his son with the Clinton campaign while participating in
Department discussions and communications about Clinton-related matters.

Kadzik also created an appearance of a conflict when he sent the
Chairman of the Clinton Campaign and a longtime friend, John Podesta,
the "Heads up" email that included the schedule for the release of
former Secretary Clinton's emails proposed to the court in a FOIA
litigation without knowing whether the information had yet been filed
and made public. His willingness to do so raised a reasonable question
about his ability to act impartially on Clinton-related matters in
connection with his official duties.

Additionally, although Department leadership determined that Kadzik
should be recused from Clintonrelated matters upon learning of his
"Heads up" email to Podesta, we found that Kadzik failed to strictly
adhere to this recusal. Lastly, because the government information in
the "Heads up" email had in fact been released publically, we did not
find that Kadzik released non-public information or misused his official
position.

FBI Records Vault Twitter Announcements
=======================================

As we describe in Chapter Fifteen, on November 1,

2016, in response to multiple FOIA requests, the FBI Records Management
Division (RMD) posted records to the FBI Records Vault, a page on the
FBI's public website, concerning the "William J. Clinton Foundation."
The \@FBIRecordsVault Twitter account announced this posting later the
same day. We concluded that these requests were processed according to
RMD's internal procedures like other similarly-sized requests, and found
no evidence that the FOIA response was expedited or delayed in order to
impact the 2016 presidential election. We also found no evidence that
improper political considerations influenced the FBI's use of the
Twitter account to publicize the release.

Recommendations
===============

Our report makes nine recommendations to the Department and the FBI to
assist them in addressing the issues that we identified in this review:

- We recommend that the Department and the FBI consider developing
    guidance that identifies the risks associated with and alternatives
    to permitting a witness to attend a voluntary interview of another
    witness (including in the witness's capacity as counsel).
- We recommend that the Department consider making explicit that,
    except in situations where the law requires or permits disclosure,
    an investigating agency cannot publicly announce its recommended
    charging decision prior to consulting with the Attorney General,
    Deputy Attorney General, U.S. Attorney, or his or her designee, and
    cannot proceed without the approval of one of these officials.
- We recommend that the Department and the FBI consider adopting a
    policy addressing the appropriateness of Department employees
    discussing the conduct of uncharged individuals in public
    statements.
- We recommend that the Department consider providing guidance to
    agents and prosecutors concerning the taking of overt investigative
    steps, indictments, public announcements, or other actions that
    could impact an election.
- We recommend that the Office of the Deputy Attorney General take
    steps to improve the retention and monitoring of text messages
    Department-wide.
- We recommend that the FBI add a warning banner to all of the FBI's
    mobile phones and devices in order to further notify users that they
    have no reasonable expectation of privacy.
- We recommend that the FBI consider (a) assessing whether it has
    provided adequate training to employees about the proper use of text
    messages and instant messages, including any related discovery
    obligations, and (b) providing additional guidance about the
    allowable uses of FBI devices for any nongovernmental purpose,
    including guidance about the use of FBI devices for political
    conversations.
- We recommend that the FBI consider whether (a) it is appropriately
    educating employees about both its media contact policy and the
    Department's ethics rules pertaining to the acceptance of gifts,
    and (b) its disciplinary provisions and penalties are sufficient to
    deter such improper conduct.
- We recommend that Department ethics officials include the review of
    campaign donations for possible conflict issues when Department
    employees or their spouses run for public office.

**TABLE OF CONTENTS**

CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION
........................
1

I.  Background
    ..............................
    1
II. Methodology
    ..............................
    3
III. Analytical Construct
    ..........................
    5
IV. Structure of the Report
    ..........................
    6 CHAPTER TWO: APPLICABLE LAWS AND DEPARTMENT POLICIES
    ........ 9

<!-- -->

I.  Policies and Laws Governing Criminal
    Investigations............ 9

    A.  Grand Jury
        Subpoenas......................
        10
    B.  Search Warrants and 2703(d) Orders
        ............... 10
    C.  Evidence Collection Related to Attorney-Client Relationships
        ..... 12
    D.  Use of Classified Evidence Before A Grand Jury
        .......... 13
    E.  Immunity Agreements
        ......................
        13

        1.  Transactional Immunity
            ...................
            13 2. Formal Use Immunity
            ....................
            14

<!-- -->

1.  a.  3.  Letter Immunity and "Queen for a Day" Agreements
            ..... 14
        4.  Act of Production Immunity
            ................
            15

<!-- -->

I.  Department Policies and Practices Governing Investigative Activities
    in

Advance of an Election
........................
16

I.  A.  Election Year Sensitivities Policy
        ..................
        16
    B.  The Unwritten 60-Day Rule
        ...................
        17

II. Public Allegations of Wrongdoing Against Uncharged Individuals and

Disclosure of Information in a Criminal Investigation
........... 18

I.  A.  FBI Media Relations Policy
        .....................
        19
    B.  28 C.F.R. § 50.2
        ........................
        20
    C.  USAM Media Relations Guidance
        ..................
        21

II. Release of Information to Congress
    ...................
    22

    A.  USAM Congressional Relations Guidance
        ............. 22
    B.  FBI Guidance on Information Sharing with Congress
        ........ 23
    C.  Current Department Policy on Communication of Investigative

Information to Congress
.....................
23

I.  A.  1.  Policy Memoranda on Department Communications with

Congress
.........................
24

I.  A.  1.  The Linder Letter
            ......................
            24

II. Special Counsel Regulations
    .......................
    25
III. Criminal Statutes Relevant to the Midyear Investigation
    .......... 26

    A.  Mishandling and Retention of Classified Information
        ......... 26

        1.  18 U.S.C. §§ 793(d) and (e)
            ................
            26
        2.  18 U.S.C. § 793(f)
            ....................
            29
        3.  18 U.S.C. § 1924
            ......................
            34

    B.  18 U.S.C. § 2071(a)
        .......................
        36 CHAPTER THREE: OVERVIEW OF THE MIDYEAR INVESTIGATION
        ........ 37

<!-- -->

I.  Referral and Opening of the Investigation
    ................ 37

    A.  Background
        ...........................
        37

        1.  Clinton's Use of Private Email Servers
            ........... 37
        2.  Production of Emails from the Private Email Servers to the
            State Department and Subsequent Deletion of Emails by
            Clinton's

Staff
...........................
37

I.  A.  State Department Inspector General and IC IG Review of Clinton's

Emails and Subsequent 811 Referral
................ 39

I.  A.  FBI's Decision to Open a Criminal Investigation
        ........... 40
    B.  Initial Briefing for the Department
        .................
        41

II. Staffing the Midyear Investigation
    ...................
    42

    A.  FBI Staffing
        ...........................
        42
    B.  Department Staffing
        .......................
        46

III. Role of Senior FBI and Department Leadership in the Investigation
    ..... 47

    A.  FBI Leadership
        ..........................
        47
    B.  Department Leadership
        ......................
        50

IV. Investigative Strategy
    .........................
    54

    A.  Collection and Examination of Emails that Traversed Clinton's
        Servers

and Other Relevant Evidence
...................
55

I.  A.  Witness Interviews
        .......................
        56
    B.  Intrusion Analysis
        ........................
        57

CHAPTER FOUR: DECISION TO PUBLICLY ACKNOWLEDGE THE MIDYEAR INVESTIGATION
AND REACTION TO WHITE HOUSE STATEMENTS ABOUT THE

INVESTIGATION
...........................
59

I.  Public Acknowledgement of the Investigation
    ............... 59

    A.  Statements about the Investigation in Department and FBI Letters
        to Congress in August and September 2015
        .............. 59
    B.  September 28, 2015 Meeting between Attorney General Lynch and

Director Comey
.........................
60

I.  A.  1.  Comey's Account of the Meeting
            ............... 60
        2.  Lynch's Recollection of the Meeting
            ............. 61
        3.  Toscas's Notes and Recollection of the Meeting
            ....... 64

    B.  October 1, 2015 Comey Meeting with Media
        ............ 65

II. Reaction to White House Statements about the Midyear Investigation
    ... 66 CHAPTER FIVE: INVESTIGATIVE METHODS USED IN THE
    INVESTIGATION ... 71

<!-- -->

I.  FBI's Efforts to Identify and Review Relevant Sources of Evidence
    .... 71
II. The Midyear Team's Efforts to Understand and Access Clinton's
    Servers .. 76
III. Use of Criminal Process to Obtain Documentary and Digital Evidence
    .... 79
IV. Use of Consent to Obtain Physical Evidence
    ................ 81

    A.  Debate over the Use of
        Consent.................
        81
    B.  Limits of Consent Agreements
        ...................
        85

V.  Efforts to Obtain Email Content from the Private Accounts of
    Clinton's Senior

Aides
.................................
88

I.  A.  Section 2703(d) Orders for Non-Content Information for Mills's
        and

Abedin's Private Email Accounts
................. 90

I.  A.  Decisions Regarding Search Warrants for Private Email Accounts
        ... 91
    B.  Access to Personal Devices for Clinton's Senior Aides
        ....... 92
    C.  Review of Abedin's Emails on the Clinton Server
        .......... 95
    D.  Decision Not to Seek Access to Certain Highly Classified
        Information 96

II. Voluntary Interviews
    .........................
    97
III. Use Immunity Agreements
    .......................
    99

    A.  Pagliano
        .............................
        99
    B.  Combetta
        ...........................
        102
    C.  Bentel
        .............................
        108

IV. Use of Consent and Act of Production Immunity to Obtain Mills and

Samuelson Testimony and Laptops
..................
109

I.  A.  Privilege Claims Raised by Mills and Samuelson
        .......... 109
    B.  Debate over Interviewing Mills and Samuelson Regarding the
        Culling Process and Obtaining the Culling Laptops
        ............. 110
    C.  Events Leading to Voluntary Interviews of Mills and Samuelson

Regarding the Culling Process
...................
112

I.  A.  1.  Attorney Proffer on March 19, 2016
            ............. 112
        2.  Midyear Team Meeting on March 28, 2016
            .......... 113
        3.  FBI Call to Wilkinson on April 8 About Mills and Samuelson
            Interviews Without Informing Prosecutors
            ......... 114
        4.  FBI Surprise Statement at Outset of April 9 Mills Interview
            . 115
        5.  Mills and Samuelson Agree to Voluntary Interviews Regarding

the Culling Process
.....................
116

I.  A.  Steps Taken to Obtain and Search the Culling Laptops
        ...... 118

        1.  Internal Strategizing and Call with Clinton's Counsel
            .... 118 2. Approval to Subpoena the Culling
            Laptops .......... 119

3\. Act of Production Immunity for Mills and Samuelson ....
120 4. Limitations in the Consents to Search the Culling Laptops ...
122

5\. Review of the Laptops
..................
125

I.  A.  Involvement of Senior Department and FBI Officials
        ........ 125
    B.  Motivations behind the Culling Testimony and Laptop Dispute
        .... 128

II. Interview of Former Secretary Clinton
    ..................
    129

    A.  Decision to Conduct Clinton's Interview
        Last........... 130
    B.  Number of People Attending ("Loaded for Bear" Text
        Message)... 130
    C.  Conduct of Clinton's Interview
        ..................
        134
    D.  Decision to Allow Mills and Samuelson to Attend Clinton
        Interview .. 138
    E.  Consideration of Subpoenaing Clinton before the Grand Jury
        .... 139

III. FBI Inspection Division Internal File Review of the Midyear
    Investigation .. 141
IV. Instant Messages Relating to the Conduct of the Midyear
    Investigation ... 144
V.  Analysis of Investigative Decisions
    ...................
    148

    A.  Preference for Consent Rather than Compulsory Process to Obtain

Evidence
............................
150

I.  A.  Decisions Not to Obtain or Seek to Review Certain
        Evidence..... 152
    B.  Voluntary Interviews
        .......................
        154
    C.  Use Immunity Agreements
        ...................
        155
    D.  Mills and Samuelson
        ......................
        157
    E.  Handling of Clinton's Interview
        .................
        160 CHAPTER SIX: "ENDGAME" DISCUSSIONS AND FORMER DIRECTOR
        COMEY'S

PUBLIC STATEMENT
.........................
163

I.  Evidence that the Case Was Headed toward a Declination
    ......... 163
II. Discussions between FBI and Department Leadership about How to
    Credibly

Announce a Declination (Spring 2016)
.................. 167

I.  A.  Initial Discussion between Comey and Yates in April 2016
        ...... 168

        1.  Options Discussed at the Meeting
            .............. 168
        2.  Comey Mentions a Special Counsel at April Meeting with

Yates
...........................
170

I.  A.  1.  Lynch's Knowledge of the April Meeting
            .......... 174

    B.  Subsequent Discussions Between Comey and Yates
        ........ 175
    C.  Other Discussions within the FBI and Department
        ......... 177

        1.  Discussions between McCabe and Carlin
            ........... 177
        2.  Discussions among Prosecutors and NSD Supervisors
            ..... 178
        3.  Additional Special Counsel Discussions
            ........... 180
        4.  NSD Notes Reflecting Plans for an Announcement
            ...... 181

II. Drafting of Former Director Comey's Public Statement
    .......... 185

    A.  Original Draft Statement
        ....................
        185
    B.  The Decision to Omit "Gross Negligence"
        ............. 191
    C.  Comey's Edits to the Statement
        ..................
        194
    D.  FBI Analysis of Legal and Policy Issues Implicated by the Draft

Statement
............................
197

I.  A.  Concerns about a Public Statement
        ............... 200
    B.  Comey's Decision Not to Inform the Department
        .......... 201

II. June 27, 2016 Tarmac Meeting and Aftermath
    ............. 202

    A.  Meeting between Lynch and Former President Clinton
        ....... 202

        1.  How the Meeting Came About
            ...............
            202 2. Discussion between Former President Clinton and Lynch
            ... 205

3\. Intervention by Lynch's Staff
............... 209

I.  A.  Responding to Media Questions about the Tarmac Meeting
        ..... 211
    B.  Discussions about Possible Recusal
        ............... 214

        1.  Departmental Ethics Opinion
            ...............
            214
        2.  Discussions about Voluntary Recusal
            ............ 214

    C.  Lynch's July 1 Aspen Institute Statement
        ............. 217
    D.  Impact of the Tarmac Meeting on Comey's Decision to Make a
        Public

Statement
............................
219

I.  July 5, 2016 Press Conference
    .....................
    221

    A.  Notifications to Department Leadership
        ............. 221

        1.  Call to Yates
            ........................
            223
        2.  Call to Lynch
            .......................
            224
        3.  Notifications to NSD
            ...................
            225

    B.  Reactions to the Statement
        ....................
        226

        1.  Department and NSD Leadership
            ............. 226
        2.  Prosecutors
            .......................
            232

II. Congressional Testimony Explaining the July 5 Statement
    ......... 233

    A.  July 7, 2016
        ...........................
        233
    B.  September 28, 2016
        .......................
        235
    C.  June 8, 2017
        ..........................
        235

III. Analysis
    ................................
    238

    A.  Comey's Decision to Make a Unilateral Announcement
        ....... 239
    B.  Content of Comey's Unilateral
        Announcement........... 245
    C.  Lynch's Decision Not to Recuse after the Tarmac Meeting
        ...... 249
    D.  Lynch's Response to Comey's Notification
        ............ 250

CHAPTER SEVEN: THE DEPARTMENT'S DECISION NOT TO PROSECUTE
...... 253

I.  The Declination Recommendation
    ....................
    253
II. The Attorney General Briefing
    ......................
    258
III. Analysis
    ................................
    260

CHAPTER EIGHT: OCTOBER EFFORTS BY FBI LEADERSHIP TO RESPOND TO

CRITICISM OF THE MIDYEAR INVESTIGATION
............. 265

I.  SAC Conference (October 11 to 14)
    ..................
    265
II. Midyear Talking Points Distributed to FBI Field Offices (October 21)
    ... 266
III. Midyear Briefing for Retired FBI Special Agents (October 21)
    ....... 267 IV. FBI Office of Public Affairs
    Research Project (October 14 to 31) ..... 269

V. FOIA and Congressional Requests in October
............... 271

CHAPTER NINE: DISCOVERY OF CLINTON EMAILS ON THE WEINER LAPTOP AND
REACTIVATION OF THE MIDYEAR INVESTIGATION
........... 273

I.  Discovery of Emails by the FBI's New York Field Office
    .......... 273

    A.  Seizure of Weiner Laptop and Devices
        ............... 273
    B.  Emails and BlackBerry PIN Message Viewed by Case Agent
        .... 273
    C.  Reporting of Clinton-Related Emails to FBI NYO Supervisors
        ..... 274
    D.  Reporting of Clinton-Related Emails to SDNY
        ............ 276

II. Reporting of Clinton-Related Emails to FBI Headquarters
    ........ 277

    A.  AD Secure Video Teleconference on September 28
        ........ 277
    B.  McCabe Post-SVTC Phone Call and Meeting on September 28
        ... 278

        1.  Phone Call with Sweeney
            ..................
            278
        2.  Meeting with Strzok and Priestap
            ............. 279

    C.  Comey and McCabe Communications After AD SVTC on September

28
...............................
280

I.  A.  Sweeney Calls Other FBI Executives on September 28
        ...... 282

        1.  Criminal EAD Coleman
            ..................
            283
        2.  National Security EAD Steinbach
            .............. 283
        3.  Counterintelligence AD Priestap
            ............... 284

II. Initial Response of FBI Headquarters to Discovery of Midyear-Related

Information on the Weiner Laptop
....................
284

I.  A.  Phone Call between Sweeney and Priestap on September 29
        .... 284
    B.  Conference Call between NYO and Midyear Personnel on September

29
...............................
285

I.  A.  1.  Testimony and Contemporaneous Notes from Call

Participants
.......................
286

I.  A.  1.  Post-Call NYO Communications
            .............. 288
        2.  Post-Call Midyear Team and FBI Headquarters Response
            .. 288

    B.  McCabe Call to NSD Leadership on October 3
        ........... 291
    C.  FBI Headquarters Discussions on October 3 and 4
        ......... 292

        1.  EAD Coleman October 3 Meeting with Baker and Bowdich ...
            292 2. Email from Bowdich to Comey on October 3
            ........ 293

3\. Meeting between Comey and Coleman on October 4 .... 293
IV. NYO Completes Processing of Weiner Laptop Around October 4
..... 295

V.  FBI Headquarters Inaction and Explanations for the Delay
    ........ 295

    A.  Delays in Processing the Weiner Laptop
        ............. 296
    B.  Prioritization of Weiner Laptop and Russia Investigation
        ...... 296
    C.  Lack of Specific Information
        ...................
        299
    D.  Questions About Legal Authority
        .................
        300
    E.  Strzok Timeline
        ........................
        300

VI. Concerns of Weiner Case Agent and Conversation with SDNY AUSAs on

October 19
..............................
302

V.  SDNY Response to Weiner Case Agent Concerns
    ............ 304

    A.  SDNY Internal Discussions on October 20
        ............ 304
    B.  SDNY Calls to ODAG and NSD on October
        21............ 304
    C.  SDNY Memo on October 21
        ....................
        306

VI. DOJ and FBI Response to SDNY Notification
    .............. 307

    A.  Prosecutor 1-Strzok Call on October 21
        ............. 307
    B.  FBI Leadership Knowledge of SDNY Notification on October 21
        ... 308
    C.  Toscas Asks McCabe About Weiner Laptop on October 24
        ...... 309
    D.  Call between McCabe, Sweeney, and NYO Criminal SAC on October

        24. ...............................
            311

VII. Reengagement of FBI Headquarters and the Midyear Team on the Weiner

Laptop
................................
311

V.  A.  McCabe Phone Call with McCord on October 25
        ........... 311
    B.  Comey, McCabe, and Sweeney Discuss the Weiner Laptop on October

        24. ...............................
            312

    C.  Midyear Team Emails on October 25
        ............... 313

VI. Events Leading to the Decision to Seek a Search Warrant
    ......... 314

    A.  Midyear-NYO-SDNY Call on October 26
        .............. 315
    B.  Briefing of McCabe on October 26
        .................
        317
    C.  McCabe Recollection of Discussion with Comey on October 26
        .... 319
    D.  McCabe Email to Comey on October 27
        ............. 320
    E.  Midyear Team Communications Preceding Comey Briefing on October

27
...............................
321

V.  A.  Comey Briefing on October 27
        ..................
        322

VI. Analysis
    ................................
    324

    A.  Failure of the FBI to Take Earlier Action on the Weiner Laptop
        .... 324
    B.  Decision to Seek Search Warrant on October 27
        ......... 330 CHAPTER TEN: THE
        DECISION TO NOTIFY CONGRESS ON OCTOBER 28 ..... 333

<!-- -->

I.  Factors Considered as Part of Comey's Decision to Notify Congress
    .... 333

    A.  Belief That Failure to Disclose Would Be an Act of Concealment
        .. 333
    B.  Perceived Obligation to Update Congress
        ............. 334
    C.  Avoiding the Perception that the FBI Concealed the New
        Information to

Help Clinton Win the Election
..................
337

I.  A.  1.  Protecting the Reputation of the FBI
            ............. 338
        2.  Protecting the Legitimacy of a Clinton
            Presidency....... 339

    B.  Concerns about the Electoral Impact of the Announcement
        .... 339
    C.  Expectation that Clinton Would Be Elected President
        ....... 342
    D.  Belief that Email Review Could Not Be Completed Before the

Election
.............................
343

I.  A.  Fear that the Information Would Be Leaked
        ........... 345

II. Comparison to Other Ongoing Investigations
    ............... 346

    A.  The Differential Treatment of the Russia Investigation
        ....... 346
    B.  The Differential Treatment of the Clinton Foundation
        Investigation .. 348

III. Internal FBI Discussions Regarding the Decision to Notify Congress
    ... 349

    A.  McCabe, Strzok, and Page Text Messages on October 27
        ..... 349
    B.  Strzok Call with Midyear SSA, Agent 1, and Agent 2 on October 28
        . 350
    C.  Agent 1's Instant Messages on October 28
        ............. 351

IV. The FBI Informs DOJ Leadership About Comey's Decision
    ......... 352

    A.  FBI and DOJ Midyear Team Discussions
        ............. 352
    B.  Department and FBI Leadership Discussions
        ............ 355

        1.  Comey's Decision Not to Engage Directly with Lynch or Yates
            356
        2.  Phone Calls between Rybicki and Axelrod
            .......... 356
        3.  Internal Department Discussions
            ............. 359
        4.  Decision Not to Order Comey to Stand Down
            ......... 360 5. Decision Not to Engage
            Directly with Comey ......... 363

6\. Comey's Reaction to the Department's Response .......
364

I.  Finalizing the FBI's October 28, 2016 Letter to Congress
    ......... 366

    A.  October 28, 2016 Letter to Congress
        ............... 366
    B.  Drafting the Letter and Key Edits
        ................
        366

        1.  "Appear to be Pertinent"
            .................
            367 2. "Briefed Me On This Yesterday"
            ...............
            368 3. Discussions About Letter With the Department
            ........ 369

4\. Comey Email to All FBI Employees
............. 370

I.  Analysis of the Decision to Send the October 28 Letter
    ......... 371

    A.  Substantive Assessment of Comey's Decision
        ........... 371

        1.  FBI and Department Norms and Policies
            ........... 371
        2.  Comey's Justification for Departing
            ............ 372
        3.  Comey's Comparison of Risks and Outcomes
            ......... 374
        4.  Fear of Leaks
            ......................
            376

    B.  Lack of Communication Between Comey and Department

Leadership
...........................
376

CHAPTER ELEVEN: COMPLETION OF THE INVESTIGATION
........... 379

I.  The October 30, 2016 Search Warrant
    ..................
    379

    A.  Decision Not to Seek Consent from Abedin and Weiner before
        Seeking

a Warrant
............................
379

I.  A.  Factual Basis of the October 30 Search Warrant Application
        ..... 380
    B.  Difference in Approach to Devices during Main Investigation
        .... 382

II. Lynch-Comey Meeting on October 31
    .................
    384
III. FBI Review of Weiner Laptop Emails
    ...................
    388 IV. Agent 1 Instant Messages from November 1
    ............... 390

V. Comey Letter to Congress on November 6
................ 390

CHAPTER TWELVE: TEXT MESSAGES, INSTANT MESSAGES, USE OF PERSONAL EMAIL,
AND ALLEGED IMPROPER DISCLOSURES OF NON-PUBLIC

INFORMATION
.............................
395

I.  Text Messages and Instant Messages
    .................
    395

    A.  Text Messages between Lisa Page and Peter Strzok
        ........ 396

        1.  Text Messages Commenting on Trump or Clinton
            ....... 399
        2.  Text Messages Discussing Political Sentiments and the
            Midyear

Investigation
.......................
401

I.  A.  1.  Text Messages Discussing Political Sentiments and the Russia

Investigation
.......................
403

I.  A.  1.  Other Notable Text Messages
            ................
            407

    B.  Instant Messages between Agent 1 and Agent 5
        ......... 410

        1.  Instant Messages Referencing the Midyear Investigation
            ... 410
        2.  Instant Messages Commenting on Trump or Clinton
            ..... 412

    C.  FBI Attorney 2 Instant Messages
        ................
        415
    D.  Analysis
        .............................
        420

II. Use of Personal Email
    .........................
    424

    A.  Comey.............................
        425
    B.  Strzok and Page
        .........................
        426

III. Allegations that Department and FBI Employees Improperly Disclosed
    Non-

Public Information
..........................
428

CHAPTER THIRTEEN: WHETHER FORMER DEPUTY DIRECTOR ANDREW MCCABE

SHOULD HAVE RECUSED FROM CERTAIN MATTERS
............ 431

I.  Introduction
    ..............................
    431
II. Timeline of Key Events
    .........................
    431
III. Relevant Standards and Procedures
    ...................
    432

    A.  Financial Conflict of Interest Statute
        ................ 432
    B.  Executive Branch Regulations Addressing Appearance Concerns and

Impartiality in Performing Official Duties
.............. 433

I.  A.  Department of Justice Regulation Requiring Disqualification
        Arising

from Personal or Political Relationships
.............. 435

I.  A.  What Constitutes "Participation" Under the Regulations
        ....... 436
    B.  FBI Procedures and Ethics Officials
        ................
        436

II. Factual Findings
    ...........................
    437

    A.  Background Facts
        .......................
        437

        1.  Andrew McCabe
            .....................
            437
        2.  FBI Clinton Investigations
            .................
            438
        3.  Dr. McCabe Meets Governor McAuliffe in February 2014
            ... 438
        4.  Recruitment to Run for Virginia State Senate in February

            2015. ..........................
                438

        5.  The McCabes' Meeting with Governor McAuliffe in March

            2015. ..........................
                438

        6.  Dr. McCabe's Campaign
            ..................
            440

    B.  McCabe Discusses Wife's Candidacy with FBI Officials, Seeks
        Ethics Advice, and Recuses from Various FBI Investigations
        ........ 441

        1.  Meeting with Comey's Chief of Staff; Extent of Director
            Comey's

Knowledge or Approval
...................
441

I.  A.  1.  Conversation with Deputy Director
            Giuliano......... 442
        2.  Meeting with Acting Chief Division Counsel on March 10
            ... 442 4. Meeting with Kelley and Baker on March 11
            ........ 443

5\. McCabe Recusal EC Issued on April
29............ 444

I.  A.  No Reassessment of Conflict/Recusal when McCabe becomes ADD or

after Dr. McCabe Loses Election
.................. 445

I.  A.  Participation in Clinton Email and Clinton Foundation
        Investigations 445

        1.  McCabe Not Recused as ADIC, ADD, or DD
            ......... 445
        2.  Recusal Concerns Related to Clintons Raised in May 2015 when

McCabe is ADIC
.....................
446

I.  A.  Clinton Email and Clinton Foundation Investigations Recusals
        ... 448

        1.  October 23, 2016 *Wall Street Journal* Article
            ......... 448
        2.  Internal Deliberations and Recusals from Clinton Email and

Clinton Foundation Investigations
.............. 449

I.  A.  1.  Participation in Clinton Foundation Investigation after
            November

1
.............................
454

I.  A.  Decision Not to Disclose McCabe's Recusals to Congress
        ...... 455

II. OIG Analysis
    .............................
    456

    A.  Recusal Issues
        ..........................
        456

        1.  Summary of Findings
            ...................
            456
        2.  Recusal from Clinton-Related Investigations
            ........ 457

    B.  Conclusion
        ...........................
        460

CHAPTER FOURTEEN: WHETHER FORMER ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL PETER J.
KADZIK SHOULD HAVE RECUSED FROM CERTAIN MATTERS ... 461

I.  Introduction
    ..............................
    461
II. Timeline of Key Events
    .........................
    462
III. Relevant Standards
    ..........................
    463

    A.  Personal and Business Relationships Creating an Appearance of a

Conflict 5 C.F.R. § 2635.502
..................
464

I.  A.  Use of Non-public Information 5 C.F.R. § 2635.703
        ......... 464
    B.  Use of Public Office for Private Gain 5 C.F.R. § 2635.702
        ..... 464

II. Factual Findings
    ...........................
    464

    A.  Background
        ..........................
        464

        1.  Peter J. Kadzik
            ......................
            464 2. John D. Podesta, Jr.
            ...................
            465 3. Office of Legislative Affairs
            ................
            465 4. Ethics Training and Obligations
            .............. 466

5\. Kadzik's Recusals
.....................
466

I.  A.  Events Preceding the "Heads Up" Email from Kadzik to Podesta
        (March

through May 2015)
.......................
467

I.  A.  1.  OLA Clinton-Related Work
            .................
            467 2. 2016 Clinton Campaign Staffed and Announced
            ....... 469

<!-- -->

1.  a.  3.  Kadzik Assists Son's Job Search
            ............... 469
        4.  Kadzik's Son Separately Seeks Employment with the Clinton

Campaign
.........................
470

1.  a.  3.  Kadzik Gives Podesta a "Heads Up"
            ............ 470

<!-- -->

I.  A.  Kadzik's Subsequent OLA Work Related to or Referencing Clinton
        . 471
    B.  Response to WikiLeaks Release
        ..................
        473
    C.  Kadzik Is Recused
        .......................
        474

II. Analysis
    ................................
    476

    A.  Whether Kadzik Should Have Been Recused Prior to November 2 from

Clinton-Related Matters under Section 502 of the Standards of Ethical

Conduct
.............................
476

I.  A.  1.  Whether There Was a Particular Matter Involving Specific

Parties
..........................
476

I.  A.  1.  Whether Kadzik Should Have Recused Because of his Son's
            Efforts to Obtain Employment with the Clinton Campaign
            ... 477
        2.  Whether Kadzik Should Have Recused from Clinton-Related
            Matters in May 2015 by Reason of Sending the "Heads Up"

Email to Podesta
......................
479

I.  A.  Whether Kadzik Violated the Terms of his Recusal after November
        2,

2016
.............................
481

I.  A.  Whether Kadzik Improperly Used Non-Public information in
        Violation of the Standards of Ethical Conduct
        ................
        482
    B.  Whether Kadzik Misused His Public Office for Private Gain in
        Violation

of the Standards of Ethical Conduct
............... 483

CHAPTER FIFTEEN: FBI RECORDS VAULT TWITTER ANNOUNCEMENTS
..... 485

I.  Introduction
    ..............................
    485
II. Background
    .............................
    486

    A.  Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552
        ........... 486
    B.  The FBI FOIA Process
        ......................
        488

        1.  Records/Information Dissemination Section's FOIA Process
            . 488
        2.  Release of FOIA Documents on the FBI Vault
            ........ 490

III. Findings
    ................................
    490

    A.  Facts
        .............................
        490

        1.  Timeline
            .........................
            490
        2.  Detailed Chronology
            ...................
            491

    B.  Analysis
        .............................
        495

CHAPTER SIXTEEN: CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
......... 497

I.  Conclusions
    .............................
    497
II. Recommendations
    ..........................
    499

**PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY**

BLANK
=====

**CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION**

**I. Background**

The Department of Justice (Department) Office of the Inspector General
(OIG) undertook this review of various actions by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) and Department in connection with the investigation
into the use of a private email server by former Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton. Clinton served as Secretary of State from January 21,
2009, until February 1, 2013, and during that time used private email
servers hosting the \@clintonemail.com domain to conduct official
Department of State (State Department) business.

In 2014, in response to a request from the State Department to Clinton
for "copies of any Federal records in her possession, such as emails
sent or received on a personal email account while serving as Secretary
of State," Clinton produced to the State Department 30,490 emails from
her private server that her attorneys determined were work-related.
Clinton and her attorneys did not produce to the State Department
approximately 31,830 emails because, they stated, they were personal in
nature, and these emails subsequently were deleted from the laptop
computers that the attorneys used to review them.

In 2015, at the State Department's request, the Office of the Inspector
General of the Intelligence Community (IC IG) reviewed emails from
Clinton's private email server that she had produced to the State
Department and identified a potential compromise of classified
information. The IC IG subsequently referred this information to the
FBI.

The FBI opened an investigation, known as "Midyear Exam" (MYE or
Midyear), into the storage and transmission of classified information on
Clinton's unclassified private servers in July 2015. Over the course of
the next year, FBI agents and analysts and Department prosecutors
conducted the investigation. Their activities included obtaining and
analyzing servers and devices used by Clinton, contents of private email
accounts for certain senior aides, and computers and email accounts used
to back up, process, or transfer Clinton's emails. The investigative
team interviewed numerous witnesses, including current and former State
Department employees.

On June 27, 2016, while the Midyear investigation was nearing
completion, then Attorney General (AG) Loretta Lynch and former
President Bill Clinton had an unscheduled meeting while their planes
were parked on the tarmac at Phoenix's

Sky Harbor Airport. Former President Clinton boarded Lynch's plane, and
Lynch, Lynch's husband, and the former President met for approximately
20 to 30 minutes. Following the meeting, Lynch publicly denied having
any conversation about the Midyear investigation or any other
substantive matter pending before the Department. Nevertheless, the
meeting created significant controversy. On July 1,

2016, Lynch publicly announced that she would accept the recommendation
of the Midyear investigative and prosecutorial team regarding whether to
charge former Secretary Clinton.

The following day, Saturday, July 2, 2016, the FBI and Department
prosecutors interviewed former Secretary Clinton at the FBI's
Headquarters building. Then, on July 5, 2016, without coordinating with
the Department and with very brief notice to it, then FBI Director James
Comey publicly delivered a statement that criticized Clinton,
characterized her and her senior aides as "extremely careless" in their
handling of classified information, and asserted that it was possible
hostile actors gained access to Clinton's personal email account. Comey
concluded, however, that the investigation should be closed because "no
reasonable prosecutor" would prosecute Clinton or others, citing the
strength of the evidence and the lack of precedent for bringing a case
on these facts. The following day, July 6, 2016, Lynch was briefed by
the prosecutors and formally accepted their recommendation to decline
prosecution.

On October 28, 2016, 11 days before the presidential election, Comey
sent a letter to Congress announcing the discovery of emails that
"appeared to be pertinent" to the Midyear investigation. Comey's
letter was referring to the FBI's discovery of a large quantity of
emails during the search of a laptop computer obtained in an unrelated
investigation of Anthony Weiner, the husband of Clinton's former Deputy
Chief of Staff and personal assistant, Huma Abedin.

The FBI obtained a search warrant to review the emails 2 days later, on
October 30, 2016. Over the next 6 days, the FBI processed and reviewed a
large volume of emails. On November 6, 2016, 2 days before the election,
Comey sent a second letter to Congress stating that the review of the
emails on the laptop had not changed the FBI's earlier conclusions with
respect to Clinton.

The OIG initiated this review on January 12, 2017, in response to
requests from numerous Chairmen and Ranking Members of Congressional
oversight committees, various organizations, and members of the public
to investigate various decisions made in the Midyear investigation. The
OIG announced that it would review the following issues:

- Allegations that Department or FBI policies or procedures were not
    followed in connection with, or in actions leading up to or related
    to, Comey's public announcement on July 5, 2016, and Comey's letters
    to Congress on October 28 and November 6, 2016, and that certain
    underlying investigative decisions were based on improper
    considerations;
- Allegations that then FBI Deputy Director Andrew McCabe should have
    been recused from participating in certain investigative matters;
- Allegations that then Assistant Attorney General for the
    Department's Office of Legislative Affairs, Peter Kadzik, improperly
    disclosed nonpublic information to the Clinton campaign and/or
    should have been recused from participating in certain matters;
- Allegations that Department and FBI employees improperly disclosed
    non-public information; and
- Allegations that decisions regarding the timing of the FBI's release
    of certain Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) documents on October 30
    and November 1, 2016, and the use of a Twitter account to publicize
    the same, were influenced by improper considerations.

The OIG announcement added that "if circumstances warrant, the OIG will
consider including other issues that may arise during the course of the
review." One such issue that the OIG added to the scope of this review
arose from the discovery of text messages and instant messages between
some FBI employees on the investigative team, conducted using FBI mobile
devices and computers, that expressed statements of hostility toward
then candidate Donald Trump and statements of support for then candidate
Clinton, as well as comments about the handling of the Midyear
investigation. We addressed whether these communications evidencing a
potential bias affected investigative decisions in the Midyear
investigation.

This review is separate from the review the OIG announced on March 28,
2018, concerning the Department's and FBI's compliance with legal
requirements, and with applicable Department and FBI policies and
procedures, in applications filed with the U.S. Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Court (FISC) relating to a certain U.S. person. We will
issue a separate report relating to those issues when our investigative
work is complete at a future date.

**II. Methodology**

During the course of this investigation, the OIG interviewed more than
100 witnesses, several on more than one occasion. These included former
Director Comey, former AG Lynch, former Deputy Attorney General (DAG)
Sally Yates, members of the former AG's and DAG's staffs, FBI agents and
supervisors and Department attorneys and supervisors who conducted the
Midyear investigation, personnel from the FBI's New York Field Office
(NYO) and the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New
York (SDNY) involved in the Anthony Weiner investigation, former and
current members of the FBI's senior executive leadership, and former
President Clinton.

All of the former Department and FBI officials we contacted to request
interviews related to the Midyear investigation agreed to be
interviewed. However, two witnesses with whom we requested interviews in
connection with our review of whether Peter Kadzik, the former Assistant
Attorney General for the Department's Office of Legislative Affairs
(OLA), should have been recused from certain matters declined our
request for an interview or were unable to schedule an interview.

We also reviewed significantly more than 1.2 million documents. Among
these were FBI documents from the Midyear investigation, including
electronic communications (EC) and interview reports (FD-302s), agent
notes from witness interviews, draft and final versions of the
letterhead memorandum (LHM) summarizing the Midyear investigation,
drafts of Comey's public statement and letters to Congress, and
contemporaneous notes from agents and supervisors involved in meetings
about the statement and letters to Congress. We also obtained documents
from prosecutors and supervisors in the Department's National Security
Division (NSD) and the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Eastern District
of Virginia (EDVA), as well as the Office of the Deputy Attorney General
(ODAG) and the Office of the Attorney General (OAG). Importantly, among
these documents were contemporaneous notes from the prosecutors and
supervisors involved in the investigation.

In connection with our efforts to investigate the circumstances
surrounding the FBI's discovery of Midyear-related emails on Anthony
Weiner's laptop computer and Comey's notification to Congress on October
28, 2016, we obtained documents from NYO and SDNY personnel. These
documents included forensic logs from processing of the Weiner laptop by
NYO Computer Analysis and Recovery Team (CART) personnel, NYO and SDNY
communications about the discovery of the emails, and other documents.

We obtained communications between and among agents, prosecutors,
supervisors, and FBI and Department officials to understand what
happened during the investigation and identify the contemporaneous
factors considered in making investigative decisions. In addition to a
large volume of emails, we obtained and reviewed well in excess of
100,000 text messages and instant messages to or from FBI personnel who
worked on the investigation.

Our review also included the examination of highly classified
information. We were given broad access to relevant materials by the
Department and the FBI, including the sensitive compartmented
information (SCI) discussed in the classified appendix to this report
and emails and instant messages from both the FBI's Top Secret SCINet
system and Secret FBINet system. Several of the State Department emails
between Secretary Clinton and her staff from the underlying Midyear
investigation included information relevant to a tightly-held Special
Access Program (SAP), and we did not seek or obtain the required
read-ins for that program. Based on our review of emails containing
redacted SAP and the FBI's explanation of the program, we determined
that this information was not needed for us to make the findings in this
report.

Finally, and as discussed in more detail below, our review included
information obtained in the Midyear investigation and the Anthony Weiner
child exploitation investigation pursuant to grand jury subpoenas and
sealed search warrants. At the Inspector General's request, the
Department sought court orders authorizing the release of sealed
information that does not otherwise affect individual privacy interests
so that we can include relevant information in this report. This
information is included in the report where appropriate.

**III. Analytical Construct**

As noted above, the OIG undertook this review to determine, among other
things, whether "certain investigative decisions taken in connection
with the Midyear investigation were based on improper considerations,"
including political bias or concerns for personal gain. In conducting
this portion of our review, it was necessary to select particular
investigative decisions for focused attention. It would not have been
possible to recreate and analyze every decision made in a year-long
complex investigation. We therefore identified particular case decisions
or other incidents which were the subject of controversy. These included
the use of consent agreements and voluntary interviews to obtain
evidence; grants of immunity to witnesses; and the decision to allow
Cheryl Mills and Heather Samuelson, two of former Secretary Clinton's
attorneys, to attend her interview.

During our investigation, we looked for direct evidence of improper
considerations, such as contemporaneous statements in emails, memoranda,
or other documents explicitly linking political or other improper
considerations to specific investigative decisions. We likewise
questioned witnesses about whether they had direct evidence of improper
considerations affecting decisionmaking. As noted above, we reviewed
significantly more than 1.2 million emails, text messages, and internal
documents relating to the investigation, and interviewed more than 100
witnesses who were involved in the matter.

We also analyzed the justifications offered for the investigative
decisions we selected for focused review (including contemporaneous
justifications and those offered after the fact) to determine whether
they were a pretext for improper, but unstated, considerations. We
conducted this assessment with appreciation for the fact that Department
and FBI officials were required to make numerous decisions involving
complex matters daily, under the unusual pressures and challenges
present in the Midyear investigation.

In the January 12, 2017 memorandum announcing this review, we stated,

"Our review will not substitute the OIG's judgment for the judgments
made by the FBI or the Department regarding the substantive merits of
investigative or prosecutive decisions." Consistent with this statement,
we do not criticize particular decisions or infer that they were
influenced by improper considerations merely because we might have
recommended a different investigative strategy or tactic based on the
facts learned during our investigation. The question we considered was
not whether a particular investigative decision was perfect or ideal or
one that we believed could have been handled more effectively, but
whether the circumstances surrounding the decision indicated that it was
based on considerations other than the merits of the investigation. If
the explanations that we were given for a particular decision were
consistent with a rational investigative strategy and not unreasonable,
we did not conclude that the decision was based on improper
considerations in the absence of evidence to the contrary. We took this
approach because our role as an OIG is not to second-guess valid
discretionary judgments made during the course of an investigation, and
this approach is consistent with the OIG's handling of such questions in
past reviews.

We applied this same standard as we reviewed and considered the

Department's declination decision, the letterhead memorandum (LHM)
summarizing the investigation, and contemporaneous emails and notes
reflecting analysis and discussion of legal research conducted by the
prosecutors.

**IV. Structure of the Report**

This report is divided into sixteen chapters. Following this
introduction, Chapter Two summarizes the relevant Department policies
governing the release of information to the public and to Congress and
the conduct of criminal investigations, as well as the relevant statutes
regarding the mishandling of classified information that provided the
legal framework for the Midyear investigation.

In Chapter Three, we provide an overview of the Midyear investigation,
including decisions about staffing and investigative strategy. In
Chapter Four, we discuss the decision to publicly acknowledge the
Midyear investigation and former President Obama's statements about the
Midyear investigation. In Chapter Five, we discuss the conduct of the
investigation, focusing on the significant investigative decisions that
were subject to criticism by Congress and the public after the fact. In
Chapters Six and Seven, we describe the events leading to former
Director Comey's July 5 statement and the Department's decision to
decline prosecution of former Secretary Clinton. Chapters Eight through
Eleven provide a chronology of events between the FBI's discovery of
Clinton-related emails on the Weiner laptop in late September 2016 and
Comey's letter to Congress on October 28, 2016, and describe the FBI's
analysis of those emails and letter to Congress on November 6, 2016.

Chapter Twelve describes the text messages and instant messages
expressing political views we obtained between certain FBI employees
involved in the Midyear investigation and provides the employees'
explanations for those messages. It also briefly discusses the use of
personal email by several FBI employees, and provides an update on the
status of the OIG's leak investigations.

Chapters Thirteen and Fourteen address allegations that then Deputy
Director Andrew McCabe and then Assistant Attorney General Peter Kadzik
should have been recused from participating in certain matters, or
violated the terms of their recusals.

Chapter Fifteen addresses allegations that the timing of the FBI's
release of FOIA documents and its use of Twitter to publicize the
release were influenced by improper considerations or were otherwise
improper.

Chapter Sixteen includes our conclusions and recommendations.

We also include a non-public classified appendix, which discusses highly
classified information relevant to the Midyear investigation (Appendix
One), and a non-public Law Enforcement Sensitive (LES) appendix
containing the complete, unmodified version of Chapter Thirteen
(Appendix Two).

We are providing copies of our unclassified report and the classified
appendix to Congress, and are publicly releasing our report without
these appendices. We also are providing copies of our unclassified
report to the Office of Special Counsel (OSC) for its consideration.

**PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY**

BLANK
=====

**CHAPTER TWO: APPLICABLE LAWS AND DEPARTMENT POLICIES**

In this chapter, we describe the applicable laws, regulations, policies,
and practices that govern the conduct of the Midyear investigation and
are relevant to the analysis in the report. We identify specific
Department and FBI policies related to investigative steps taken during
the Midyear investigation, overt investigative activities in advance of
an election, and the disclosure of information to the media and to
Congress. We also describe the Department regulations governing the
appointment of a special counsel.

Finally, we summarize the criminal statutes relevant to the Midyear
investigation. These statutes provide the legal framework for our
discussion of the investigative strategy and the FBI's and Department's
assessment of the evidence in subsequent chapters.

**I. Policies and Laws Governing Criminal Investigations**

Under federal law, investigators and prosecutors are given substantial
authority and discretion in conducting criminal investigations. To
navigate challenges and issues that they may face during these
investigations, and to assist them in exercising their authority and
discretion appropriately, the Department maintains the United States
Attorneys Manual (USAM) as a "comprehensive.quick and ready reference
for.attorneys responsible for the prosecution of violations of
federal law." USAM 1-1.2000, 1-1.1000. In reviewing investigative
decisions made during the Midyear investigation, we identified several
provisions of the USAM of potential relevance.

The principles guiding the exercise of decisions related to federal
prosecutorial discretion and those relevant to criminal prosecutions can
be found within USAM Title 9-27.000, the Principles of Federal
Prosecution. There the Department lays out guidance for federal
prosecutors with the intent of "ensuring the fair and effective exercise
of prosecutorial discretion and responsibility by attorneys for the
government, and promoting confidence on the part of the public and
individual defendants that important prosecutorial decisions will be
made rationally and objectively on the merits of the facts and
circumstances of each case." USAM 9-27.001. USAM Section 9-27.220
specifies grounds for commencing or declining prosecution, stating that
an attorney for the government should commence or recommend federal
prosecution if he or she believes that the person's conduct constitutes
a federal offense, and that the admissible evidence will probably be
sufficient to obtain and sustain a conviction, unless the prosecution
would serve no substantial federal interest, the person is subject to
effective prosecution in another jurisdiction, or there exists an
adequate non-criminal alternative to prosecution. This section also
states, "Both as a matter of fundamental fairness and in the
interest of the efficient administration of justice, no prosecution
should be initiated against any person unless the attorney for the
government believes that the admissible evidence is sufficient to obtain
and sustain a guilty verdict by an unbiased trier of fact."

A.  **Grand Jury Subpoenas**

A federal grand jury is a group of sixteen to twenty-three eligible
citizens, empaneled by a federal court that considers evidence in order
to decide if there has been a violation of federal law. Fed. R. Crim. P.
6(a)(1). It is the responsibility of federal prosecutors "to advise the
grand jury on the law and to present evidence for its consideration."
USAM 9-11.010.

Grand jury subpoenas are one tool frequently used by federal prosecutors
to collect evidence to present to a grand jury. USAM 9-11.120, Fed. R.
Crim. P. 17. There are two types of grand jury subpoenas: (1) a grand
jury subpoena *ad testificandum* which compels an individual to testify
before the grand jury; and (2) a grand jury subpoena *duces tecum* which
compels an individual or entity, such as a business, to produce
documents, records, tangible objects, or other physical evidence to the
grand jury. G.J. Manual § 5.2; Fed. R. Crim. P. 17.^[^1^](#fn1){#fnref1
.footnote-ref}^

Federal prosecutors have "considerable latitude in issuing grand
jury subpoenas." G.J. Manual § 5.4 (*quoting* *Doe* v. *DiGenova*, 779
F.2d 74, 80 (D.C. Cir. 1985)). Nonetheless, "the powers of the grand
jury are not unlimited." G.J. Manual § 5.1 (*quoting* *Branzburg* v.
*Hayes*, 408 U.S. 665, 688 (1972)). A court may quash a grand jury
subpoena, upon motion, "if compliance would be unreasonable or
oppressive." Fed. R. Crim. P. 17. In addition, a grand jury subpoena
cannot override the invocation of a valid "constitutional, common-law,
or statutory privilege" and cannot be used when "a federal statute
requires the use of a search warrant or other court order." G.J. Manual
§ 5.1 (*quoting* *Branzburg*, 408 U.S. at 688) and §§ 5.6, 5.26. These
limitations are discussed, insofar as they are relevant to this review,
in subparts I.B., I.C., and 1.E. of this chapter.

There are also policy limitations governing the use of grand jury
subpoenas. For example, the USAM provides guidelines for issuing grand
jury subpoenas to attorneys regarding their representation of
clients.^[^2^](#fn2){#fnref2 .footnote-ref}^ USAM 9-13.410. These
guidelines are discussed in subpart I.B. of this chapter. In addition,
the USAM generally advises prosecutors to consider alternatives to grand
jury subpoenas, such as obtaining testimony and other evidence by
consent, in light of the requirement that the government maintain the
secrecy of any testimony or evidence accessed through the grand jury.
USAM 9-11.254(1).

A.  **Search Warrants and 2703(d) Orders**

The Fourth Amendment protects individuals from unlawful searches and
seizures of their property. Generally, the government must obtain a
search warrant before searching a person's property in which the person
retains a reasonable expectation of privacy. *United States* v. *Ross*,
456 U.S. 798, 822-23 (1982). Courts have held that individuals retain a
reasonable expectation of privacy in data held within electronic storage
devices, such as computers and cellular telephones. *E.g., Riley v.
California*, 134 S. Ct. 2473, 2485 (2014); [*Trulock v.
Freeh*](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)[,
275](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)
[F.3d](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)

[391, 403 (4th
Cir.](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)
[](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)
[2001).](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)
To obtain a search warrant pursuant to Federal Rule of Criminal
Procedure 41 (Rule 41 search warrant), the government must make a
showing of facts under oath demonstrating probable cause to believe that
the property to be searched contains evidence of a crime. Thus, while
the government may issue a grand jury subpoena to obtain an electronic
device, such as a computer or cellular telephone, the government
generally will only be able to search the electronic device if it can
demonstrate probable cause to believe the device contains evidence of a
crime.

In addition, as discussed above, a grand jury subpoena cannot be used
when "a federal statute requires the use of a search warrant or other
court order." The Stored Communications Act provides that the government
must obtain a search warrant in order to require a "provider of
electronic communication service" to produce the contents of a
subscriber's electronic communication that have been in electronic
storage for 180 days or less. *See* 18 U.S.C. § 2703(a). For the content
of electronic communications that have been in electronic storage for
more than 180 days, the government must usually either obtain a search
warrant or provide prior notice to the subscriber or customer and obtain
a court order or subpoena.^[^3^](#fn3){#fnref3 .footnote-ref}^ *See* 18
U.S.C. § 2703(b). Thus, except for specific circumstances, in order to
obtain the contents of an individual's email communications that are
older than 180 days from a communications service provider such as
Yahoo! or Google (Gmail) without notifying the subscriber in advance,
the government must first obtain a Rule 41 search warrant upon a showing
of probable cause that the stored emails in possession of the provider
contain evidence of a crime.

Independent of whether the government can make the requisite probable
cause showing to warrant a Rule 41 search warrant, the government may be
able to obtain a court order pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 2703(d) (2703(d)
order). A 2703(d) order requires a communications service provider to
produce information related to an individual's email account other than
the content of the individual's emails, such as subscriber information
and email header information. A court will issue a 2703(d) order if the
government "offers specific and articulable facts showing that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that.the records or other information
sought, are relevant and material to an ongoing criminal investigation."
18 U.S.C. § 2703(d).

**C. Evidence Collection Related to Attorney-Client Relationships**

The USAM contains guidelines for the use of subpoenas and search
warrants to obtain information from attorneys related to their
representation of clients.

When a subpoena issued to an attorney may relate to information
concerning the attorney's representation of a client, the USAM mandates
additional process. USAM 9-13.410. As a preliminary matter, all
reasonable attempts must be made to obtain the information from
alternative sources (specifically including by consent) before issuing
the subpoena to the attorney, unless such efforts would compromise the
investigation. The Department thereafter exercises "close control" over
the issuance of such a subpoena. Before seeking such a subpoena, it
"must first be authorized by the Assistant Attorney General or a DAAG
Deputy Assistant Attorney

General for the Criminal Division" except in unusual circumstances.
Before the Department official can authorize the subpoena, several
principles must be examined regarding the submitted draft subpoena,
including:

- All reasonable attempts to obtain the information from alternative
    sources shall have proved unsuccessful;
- The information sought is reasonably needed for the successful
    completion of the investigation;
- In a criminal investigation, there must be reasonable grounds to
    believe that a crime has been or is being committed, and that the
    information sought is reasonably needed for the successful
    completion of the investigation or prosecution; and
- The need for the information must outweigh the potential adverse
    effects upon the attorney-client relationship.

USAM 9-13.410.C.

The intent behind this additional process is to strike a "balance
between an individual's right to the effective assistance of counsel and
the public's interest in the fair administration of justice and
effective law enforcement." USAM 913.410.B.

The Department similarly exercises "close control" when law enforcement
seeks the issuance of a search warrant for "the premises of an attorney
who is a subject of an investigation, and who also is or may be engaged
in the practice of law on behalf of clients." USAM 9-13.420. Such a
search has the potential to "effect.legitimate attorney-client
relationships" or uncover material "protected by a legitimate claim of
privilege." *Id.* Therefore, prosecutors "are expected to take the
least intrusive approach consistent with vigorous and effective law
enforcement when evidence is sought from an attorney actively engaged in
the practice of law." USAM 9-13.420.A. Unless it would compromise an
investigation, the USAM advises that consideration be given to obtaining
needed information from other sources or through the use of consent or a
subpoena, rather than issuing such a search warrant. USAM 9-13.420.A.
Consultation with the Criminal Division and approval from an Assistant
Attorney General or U.S. Attorney are required as well. USAM
913.420.B-C.

The use of process to recover materials from "disinterested third
parties," including disinterested third party attorneys, requires
consideration of additional guidance under 28 C.F.R. § 59.1 and USAM
9-19.220. Pursuant to 28 C.F.R. § 59.1(b), "It is the responsibility of
federal officers and employees to.protect against unnecessary
intrusions. Generally, when documentary materials are held by a
[disinterested third
party,](https://www.law.cornell.edu/definitions/index.php?width=840&height=800&iframe=true&def_id=c7910d04083ac94b0995e93a0d88c168&term_occur=1&term_src=Title:28:Chapter:I:Part:59:59.1)
a subpoena, administrative summons, or governmental request will be an
effective alternative to the use of a search warrant and will be
considerably less intrusive." Similarly, USAM 9-19.220 provides, "As
with other disinterested third parties, a search warrant should normally
not be used to obtain.confidential materials" from a disinterested
third party attorney.

D.  **Use of Classified Evidence Before A Grand Jury**

The classification of information and evidence can be another
significant challenge for a federal prosecutor advising a grand jury.
*See* USAM 9-90.230. Because jurors lack security clearances, the
disclosure of such information "may only be done with the approval of
the agency responsible for classifying the information." USAM
9-90.230. Though the Department offers measures to "increase the
likelihood" a classifying agency will approve the use of such
information, the Department encourages prosecutors to consider several
alternatives to seeking such disclosures. *Id.* A significant number of
limitations and high-level Department approvals make seeking approval
from the classifying agency complex, and inevitably such approval takes
additional time. *See* USAM 9-90.200, 210.

D.  **Immunity Agreements**

When a witness invokes their Fifth Amendment right against
selfincrimination, the government must either forgo the witness's
incriminating testimony or offer the witness protection from prosecution
resulting from such testimony, a protection known as "use immunity." 28
C.F.R. § 0.175(a), Crim. Resource Manual 716. The term "use immunity"
encompasses several degrees of legal protections for a witness:
transactional immunity, formal use immunity, letter immunity, and "Queen
for a Day" agreements. Crim. Resource Manual 719.

D.  1.  **Transactional Immunity**

Transactional immunity offers the highest level of legal protection to a
compelled witness, protecting the witness from actual prosecution for
the offense(s) involved in the Grand Jury proceeding. Crim. Resource
Manual 717. For decades prior to 1972, the Supreme Court only recognized
transactional immunity as the government vehicle to compel testimony
from a witness invoking their Fifth

Amendment rights. *See Kastigar* v. *United States*, 406 U.S. 441,
449-52 (1972).

D.  1.  **Formal Use Immunity**

In 1970, Congress created a framework for the Department to grant formal
"use immunity" for a witness offering testimony in a federal criminal
investigation. 18 U.S.C. § 6002; Crim. Resource Manual 716. Unlike
transactional immunity, use immunity only protects the witness against
the government's use of the immunized testimony in a subsequent
prosecution of the witness, except for perjury or giving a false
statement. Crim. Resource Manual 717. However, the Supreme Court
subsequently found that the statutory framework creating formal use
immunity also prohibits the government from using immunized testimony to
discover new evidence that is then used to prosecute the witness.
*Kastigar*, 406 U.S. at 453. This additional protection is known as
"derivative use immunity." Crim. Resource Manual 718. Thus, the
government retains the ability to prosecute a witness given formal use
immunity, but only with evidence obtained independently of the witness's
immunized testimony. Crim. Resource Manual 717-18. In order to do so,
the government must overcome a "heavy, albeit not insurmountable burden,
by a preponderance of the evidence" to demonstrate wholly independent
discovery of such evidence. *United States* v. *Allen*, 864 F.3d 63, 92
(2d Cir. 2017) (*citing* *Kastigar*, 406 U.S. at 460).

To obtain formal, court-ordered use immunity, a U.S. Attorney, after
obtaining the approval of the Attorney General or her designee and the
Criminal Division, seeks a court order to compel testimony of a witness
appearing before the grand jury. 18 U.S.C. § 6003(b); USAM 9-23.130.
Such compelled testimony should be sought when the witness's testimony,
in the judgment of the U.S. Attorney, is necessary for the public
interest and the witness is likely to invoke (or has invoked) their
Fifth Amendment privilege against
self-incrimination.^[^4^](#fn4){#fnref4 .footnote-ref}^ *Id.* The
decision to grant immunity by a designated Department division
ultimately requires final approval from the Department's Criminal
Division. Crim. Resource Manual 720. Once the U.S. Attorney receives
Department approval, he or she submits a motion to the judge overseeing
the grand jury requesting the order to compel testimony from the
witness. *Id.* at 723.

D.  1.  **Letter Immunity and "Queen for a Day" Agreements**

In contrast with transactional and formal use immunity, a witness
receiving either letter immunity or a "Queen for a Day" agreement is
provided legal protections by the prosecutor pursuant to an agreement in
exchange for the witness's agreement to provide testimony. Crim.
Resource Manual 719. The legal protections the witness receives for
voluntary testimony result from the type of agreement the witness makes
with the prosecutor. *Id.*

Letter immunity describes an agreement between the prosecuting office
and the witness that results in a letter from the prosecuting office to
the witness authorizing the grant of legal
protections.^[^5^](#fn5){#fnref5 .footnote-ref}^ *Id.* While the
provisions of the agreement can vary, as a general matter letter
immunity, like formal immunity, only protects the witness against the
government's use of the immunized testimony in a subsequent prosecution
of the witness, except for perjury or giving a false statement. Crim.
Resource Manual 717; *see United States* v. *Pelletier*, 898 F.2d 297,
301 (2d Cir. 1990). Depending on the provisions of the agreement, the
government may retain the ability to prosecute the witness with evidence
obtained independently of the witness's immunized testimony, but as with
formal use immunity, the government bears a considerable burden in such
a prosecution. Crim. Resource Manual 717-18; *see also* *Pelletier*, 88
F.2d at 303.

In a "Queen for a Day" agreement, often referred to as a "proffer"
agreement, a witness "proffers" or informs prosecutors of what the
witness would state under oath if called to testify and, in exchange,
the federal prosecutor agrees to limited legal protection for the
witness conditioned on the witness's truthful testimony. Crim. Resource
Manual 719. In a standard "Queen for a Day" agreement, the government
agrees not to use any statements made by the witness pursuant to the
proffer agreement against the witness in its case-in-chief in any
subsequent prosecution of the witness, or in connection with the
sentencing of the witness if the witness is subsequently prosecuted and
convicted. However, unlike with formal use immunity or letter use
immunity, the government typically may use leads obtained from the
witness's statements to develop evidence against the witness and may use
the witness's statements to cross-examine the witness in any future
prosecution of the witness. *United States* v. *Stein*, 440 F. Supp. 2d
315, 322 (S.D.N.Y. 2006); *see also* Richard B. Zabel and James J.
Benjamin, Jr., *"Queen for a Day" or "Courtesan for a Day": The Sixth
Amendment Limits to Proffer Agreements,* 15 No. 9 White--Collar Crime
Rep. 1 (2001).

D.  1.  **Act of Production Immunity**

Act of production or "Doe" immunity describes a distinct type of
immunity applying to a witness's production of records, instead of
witness testimony. USAM 9-23.250; *United States* v. *Doe*, 465 U.S. 605
(1984). The production of records by a witness in response to a grand
jury subpoena potentially implicates the right against
self-incrimination if the fact that the witness produced the records
could be used against the witness in a future prosecution as an
admission of the existence and possession of the records. USAM
9-23.250*.* The Department uses the same procedure to grant act of
production immunity as it does for formal use immunity, producing a
formal letter authorizing the U.S. Attorney to make a motion for a
judicial order to compel the production of specifically enumerated
records in exchange for not using the witness' act of production against
the witness in a subsequent prosecution of the witness. *Id.*; Crim.
Resource Manual 722.

Alternatively, the prosecutor can enter into a letter agreement with the
individuals. In either situation, the act of production immunity does
not provide any protection for the witness from a future prosecution.

**II. Department Policies and Practices Governing Investigative
Activities in Advance of an Election**

Department policies require all Department officials to "enforce the
laws.in a neutral and impartial manner" and to remain "particularly
sensitive to safeguarding the Department's reputation for fairness,
neutrality, and nonpartisanship."^[^6^](#fn6){#fnref6 .footnote-ref}^
Various policies also address investigative activities timed to affect
an election and require that prosecutors and agents consult with the
Criminal Division's Public Integrity Section (PIN) before taking overt
investigative steps in advance of a primary or general election. No
Department policy contains a specific prohibition on overt investigative
steps within a particular period before an election. Nevertheless,
various witnesses testified that the Department has a longstanding
unwritten practice to avoid overt law enforcement and prosecutorial
activities close to an election, typically within 60 or 90 days of
Election Day. We discuss relevant Department policies and practices
below.

A.  **Election Year Sensitivities Policy**

In 2008, 2012, and 2016, the then Attorney General issued a memorandum
"to remind all Department employees of the Department's existing
policies with respect to political activities."^[^7^](#fn7){#fnref7
.footnote-ref}^ These memoranda are substantially similar. Each
memorandum contains two sections, one addressing the investigation and
prosecution of election crimes and the other describing restrictions
imposed on Department employees by the Hatch Act.^[^8^](#fn8){#fnref8
.footnote-ref}^ In its election crimes section, the 2016 memorandum
requires consultation with PIN at "various stages of all criminal
matters that focus on violations of federal and state campaign-finance
laws, federal patronage laws and corruption of the election
process."^[^9^](#fn9){#fnref9 .footnote-ref}^ However, the memorandum
also states the following:

Simply put, politics must play no role in the decisions of federal
investigators or prosecutors regarding any investigations or criminal
charges. Law enforcement officers and prosecutors may never select the
timing of investigative steps or criminal charges for the purpose of
affecting any election, or for the purpose of giving an advantage or
disadvantage to any candidate or political party. Such a purpose is
inconsistent with the Department's mission and with the Principles of
Federal Prosecution.

Likewise, the 2016 memorandum recommends that all Department employees
consult with PIN whenever an employee is "faced with a question
regarding the timing of charges or overt investigative steps near the
time of a primary or general election," without regard to the type or
category of crime at issue.^[^10^](#fn10){#fnref10 .footnote-ref}^ Ray
Hulser, the former Section Chief of PIN who currently is a DAAG in the
Criminal Division, told us that this policy does not impose a "mandatory
consult" with PIN, but rather encourages prosecutors to call if they
have questions about investigative steps or criminal charges before an
election.

A.  **The Unwritten 60-Day Rule**

After the FBI released its October 28, 2016 letter to Congress informing
them that the FBI had learned of the existence of additional emails and
planned to take investigative steps to review them, contemporaneous
emails between Department personnel highlighted editorials authored by
former Department officials discussing a longstanding Department
practice of delaying overt investigative steps or disclosures that could
impact an election. These former officials cited the so-called "60-Day
Rule," under which prosecutors avoid public disclosure of investigative
steps related to electoral matters or the return of indictments against
a candidate for office within 60 days of a primary or general
election.^[^11^](#fn11){#fnref11 .footnote-ref}^

The 60-Day Rule is not written or described in any Department policy or
regulation. Nevertheless, high-ranking Department and FBI officials
acknowledged the existence of a general practice that informs Department
decisions. Former Director Comey characterized the practice during his
OIG testimony as "a very important norm which is.we avoid taking any
action in the run up to an election, if we can avoid it." Preet Bharara,
the former U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York, told us
that the Department's most explicit policy is about crimes that affect
the integrity of an election, such as voter fraud, but that there is
generalized, unwritten guidance that prosecutors do not indict political
candidates or use overt investigative methods in the weeks before an
election.

Several Department officials described a general principle of avoiding
interference in elections rather than a specific time period before an
election during which overt investigative steps are prohibited. Former
AG Lynch told the OIG, "In general, the practice has been not to
take actions that might have an impact on an election, even if it's not
an election case or something like that." Former DAG Yates stated, "I
look at it sort of differently than 60 days. To me if it were 90 days
off, and you think it has a significant chance of impacting an election,
unless there's a reason you need to take that action now you don't do
it." Former Principal Associate Deputy Attorney General Matt Axelrod
stated, ".DOJ has policies and procedures on.how you're supposed
to handle this. And remember.those policies and procedures apply
to.every election at whatever level.. They apply, you know, months
before.. People sometimes have a misimpression there's a magic
60-day rule or 90-day rule. There isn't. But.the closer you get to
the election the more fraught it is."

Hulser told the OIG that there was "a sense, there still is, that there
is a rule out there, that there is some specific place where it says 60
days or 90 days back from a primary or general election, that you
can't indict or do specific investigative steps." He said that there is
not any such specific rule, and there never has been, but that there is
a general admonition that politics should play no role in investigative
decisions, and that taking investigative steps to impact an election is
inconsistent with the Department's mission and violates the principles
of federal prosecution.

Hulser said that while working on the Election Year Sensitivities
memorandum, they considered codifying the substance of the 60-Day Rule,
but that they rejected that approach as unworkable, and instead included
the general admonition described above. Citing PIN guidance, Hulser told
OIG that a prosecutor should look to the needs of the case and
significant investigative steps should be taken "when the case is ready,
not earlier or later."^[^12^](#fn12){#fnref12 .footnote-ref}^

**III. Public Allegations of Wrongdoing Against Uncharged Individuals
and Disclosure of Information in a Criminal Investigation**

The USAM instructs prosecutors that "in all public filings and
proceedings, federal prosecutors should remain sensitive to the privacy
and reputation interests of uncharged third-parties" and that there is
ordinarily no legitimate governmental interest in the public allegation
of wrongdoing by an uncharged party. USAM 927.760. Accordingly, even
where prosecutors have concluded that an uncharged individual committed
a crime, Department policies generally prohibit the naming of unindicted
individuals (as well as co-conspirators) because their privacy and
reputational interests merit significant consideration and protection.
*See* USAM 911.130, 9-16.500, 9-27.760.

Department regulations governing interactions with the media recognize
that "the availability to news media of information in criminal and
civil cases is a matter which has become increasingly a subject of
concern in the administration of justice." 28 C.F.R. § 50.2(a)(1).
Addressing this concern, the FBI issued a Media Relations Policy Guide
for FBI personnel. The FBI Media Relations Policy Guide recognizes that
the regulations found at 28 C.F.R. § 50.2 lay out specific and
controlling guidelines addressing the release of information to the
media from Department authorities as well as from subordinate law
enforcement components, including the FBI. *Id.*; *see also* 28 C.F.R. §
0.1. The FBI Media Relations Policy Guide also recognizes that the USAM
offers further specific guidance consistent with federal regulations in
its Media Policy section "governing the release of information.by all
components (FBI.and DOJ divisions) and personnel of the Department of
Justice." USAM 1-7.001. The Department's policy and regulations forbid
the confirmation or denial and any discussion of active investigations,
except in limited, specified circumstances. USAM 1-7.530. Taken
together, these documents offer an understanding of Department
operations related to the media, particularly publicity around FBI
investigations.

**A. FBI Media Relations Policy**

In October 2015, the FBI issued the version of its *Media Relations at
FBI Headquarters (HQ) and in Field Offices Policy Guide* ("FBI Media
Policy Guide") pertinent to this review.^[^13^](#fn13){#fnref13
.footnote-ref}^ The FBI Media Policy Guide recognizes that the FBI
Office of Public Affairs (FBI OPA) "works to enhance the public's trust
and confidence in the FBI by releasing and promoting information about
the FBI's responsibilities, operations, accomplishments, policies, and
values." The FBI Media Policy Guide confirms that FBI OPA "operations
are governed by DOJ-OPA's instructions, located at Title 28 Code of
Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) § 50.2, and by the *United States
Attorneys' Manual* USAM, Title 1-7.000, 'Media Relations.'" As such,
where the guidance in the FBI Media Policy Guide conflicts with the USAM
or 28 C.F.R. § 50.2, the USAM and Code of Federal Regulations control
FBI media practices.

In its provisions governing disclosure of information to the media from
FBI

Headquarters in Washington, the FBI Media Policy Guide states "the
FBI Director, FBI deputy director (DD), associate deputy
director (ADD), Assistant Director for FBI OPA, and FBI OPA
personnel designated by the OPA Assistant Director are authorized to
speak to the media." However "all releases of information by.any
FBI personnel.authorized to speak to the media must conform with all
applicable laws and regulations, as well as policies issued by DOJ,"
which includes specific reference to the USAM, among other Department
legal authorities. The FBI

Media Policy Guide itself constrains authorized disclosures, explaining
"disclosures must not prejudice an adjudicative proceeding
and.must not address an ongoing investigation" except in specified
circumstances.^[^14^](#fn14){#fnref14 .footnote-ref}^ The FBI Media
Policy Guide offers limited justifications to release information
regarding an ongoing investigation, specifying the need "to assure the
public that an investigation is in progress,.to protect the
public interest, welfare, or safety,.or to solicit information
from the public that might be relevant to an investigation." Any such
release requires "prior approval of FBIHQ entities.and the
careful supervision of OPA."

The FBI Media Policy Guide specifies that when releasing information to
the media via a press conference, FBI OPA personnel "must request
approval.in advance from DOJ-OPA for any case or investigation that
may result in an indictment." Further, FBI personnel "must coordinate
with DOJ OPA on any materials, quotes, or information to be released in
the press conference."

B.  **28 C.F.R. § 50.2**

In all criminal matters, federal regulations bar Department personnel
from "furnishing any statement or information.if such a statement
or information may reasonably be expected to influence the outcome
of.a future trial." 28 C.F.R. § 50.2(b)(2). The regulation also
provides that "where information relating to the circumstances of.an
investigation would be highly prejudicial or where the release thereof
would serve no law enforcement function, such information should not be
made public." 28 C.F.R. § 50.2(b)(3).

The regulations permit, subject to limitations, some facts to be
released publicly, including a defendant's name, age, and similar
background information, the substance of the charges at issue, specified
details regarding an investigation, and the circumstances surrounding an
arrest. *See* 28 C.F.R. § 50.2(b)(3). But while permitting this limited
release, the regulation specifies that the Department personnel making
the public "disclosures should include only incontrovertible, factual
matters, and should not include subjective observations." *Id.* These
strict limitations "shall apply to the release of information to news
media from the time a person is the subject of a criminal investigation
until any proceeding resulting from such an investigation has been
terminated by trial or otherwise." 28 C.F.R. § 50.2(b)(1). A Department
official explained to the OIG that "otherwise" included criminal actions
ended when the Department declines to prosecute.

The regulations do provide for exceptions, acknowledging situations in
which the regulations "limit the release of information which would not
be prejudicial under the particular circumstances." 28 C.F.R. §
50.2(b)(9). When a Department official believes that "in the interest of
the fair administration of justice and the law enforcement process
information beyond these guidelines should be released, in a particular
case, he shall request the permission of the Attorney General or the
Deputy Attorney General to do so." *Id.*

B.  **USAM Media Relations Guidance**

The Attorney General's central role to information disclosures to the
media is also recognized in the USAM's Media Relations
policy.^[^15^](#fn15){#fnref15 .footnote-ref}^ *See* USAM 1-7.210. The
USAM makes clear that "final responsibility for all matters
involving the news media and the Department is vested in the
Director of the Office of Public Affairs (OPA)" and, without exception,
the "Attorney General is to be kept fully informed of appropriate
matters at all times." USAM 1-7.210.

The USAM's Media Relations section offers several provisions governing
how information disclosure to the media may permissibly take place.
Overall, the USAM 1-701(E) requires "any public communication by
any.investigative agency about pending matters or investigations that
may result in a case, or about pending cases or final dispositions, must
be approved by the appropriate Assistant Attorney General, the United
States Attorney, or other designate responsible for the case."
Reinforcing a general principle of non-disclosure, the USAM declares
"at no time shall any component or personnel of the Department of
Justice furnish any statement or information that he or she knows or
reasonably should know will have a substantial likelihood of materially
prejudicing an adjudicative proceeding." USAM 1-7.500.

In keeping with that principle, USAM 1-7.530 instructs Department
personnel that, except in unusual circumstances, they "shall not respond
to questions about the existence of an ongoing investigation or comment
on its nature or progress, including such things as the issuance or
serving of a subpoena, prior to the public filing of the document."
Those unusual circumstances where comment may be appropriate included
"matters that have already received substantial publicity, or about
which the community needs to be reassured that the appropriate law
enforcement agency is investigating the incident, or where release of
information is necessary to protect the public interest, safety, or
welfare." USAM 1-7.530. But in any such circumstances, "the involved
investigative agency will consult and obtain approval from
the.Department Division handling the matter prior to disseminating
any information to the media." *Id.*

USAM 1-7.401 addresses specifically press conferences, emphasizing a
preference for written press releases as the "usual method to release
public information.by investigative agencies." While permissible,
press conferences "should be held only for the most significant and
newsworthy actions, or if a particularly important deterrent or law
enforcement purpose would be served. Prudence and caution should be
exercised in the conduct of any press conference." USAM 1-7.401.
Repeatedly the USAM states that before holding a press conference "prior
coordination with OPA is required" for information "of national
significance." USAM 1-7.330(B), 1-7.401(B).

**IV. Release of Information to Congress**

The provision of information from the Department and the FBI to Congress
is governed by Department policy guidance, the USAM, and FBI
rules.^[^16^](#fn16){#fnref16 .footnote-ref}^

**A. USAM Congressional Relations Guidance**

Under the USAM Title 1-8.000, and consistent with 28 C.F.R. § 0.27,
communications between Congress and the Department are the
responsibility of the Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legislative
Affairs (OLA).^[^17^](#fn17){#fnref17 .footnote-ref}^ As written, the

USAM 1-8.000 generally addresses personnel within the staff of the
various United States Attorneys' Offices. However, USAM 1-8.000
explicitly applies to Department components and several provisions of
the USAM guidance regarding the

Department's congressional relations bind all Department
personnel.^[^18^](#fn18){#fnref18 .footnote-ref}^

One such provision is USAM 1-8.030 requiring coordination of a
Department response when Congress seeks information that is not public.
USAM 1-8.030 states "all Congressional requests for information
(other than public information), meetings of any type, or assistance
must immediately be referred to the.OLA." The USAM lists the
following examples of congressional requests requiring referral to OLA:
"requests for non-public documents or information; discussion of or
requests for briefings on cases;.and suggestions or comments on
case disposition or other treatment." USAM 1-8.030. These standards
apply "in both open and closed cases" and the USAM highlights a specific
bar on "providing information on (1) pending investigations;.(3)
matters that involve grand jury, tax, or other restricted information;
(4) matters that would reveal.sensitive investigative techniques,
deliberative processes, the reasoning behind the exercise of
prosecutorial discretion, or the identity of individuals who may have
been investigated but not indicted."^[^19^](#fn19){#fnref19
.footnote-ref}^ *Id.*

B.  **FBI Guidance on Information Sharing with Congress**

The FBI's status as the primary investigative agency of the federal
government makes its sharing of information with Congress of special
concern. Relevant guidance is provided in *The Attorney General's
Guidelines for Domestic*

*FBI Operations* ("AGG-Dom") and the FBI's Domestic Investigations and
Operations Guide ("DIOG"). The AGG-Dom directs that the FBI may
"disseminate information obtained or produced" through its domestic
investigations "to congressional committees as authorized by the
Department of Justice Office of Legislative
Affairs."^[^20^](#fn20){#fnref20 .footnote-ref}^ AGG-Dom § VI.B.1(c).
This direction is reinforced in the DIOG's section on the retention and
sharing of information, which states "that the FBI may disseminate
information obtained or produced through activities under the
AGGDom.to Congress or to congressional committees in coordination
with the FBI

Office of Congressional Affairs (OCA) and the DOJ Office of Legislative
Affairs." DIOG § 14.3.1(D). Notably, both the AGG-DOM and DIOG
anticipate circumstances requiring departure from their rules. DIOG §§
2.6-2.7. The DIOG spells out how such departures may occur, usually
involving high-level FBI approval, coordination with the FBI Office of
General Counsel, and notice and/or approval at the highest levels of the
Department of Justice. *Id.*

B.  **Current Department Policy on Communication of Investigative
    Information to Congress**

While the USAM, AGG-Dom, and DIOG lay out the consistent institutional
relationships in the Department and its components for Congressional
information flow, the Department also uses policy memoranda and other
communications to provide guidance on how communication should be
handled with Congress in sensitive, investigation-related circumstances.
Among these are two memoranda governing Department communications with
Congress and a letter addressing the principles of Department
communications with Congress on ongoing investigations.

**1. Policy Memoranda on Department Communications with Congress**

On May 11, 2009, then Attorney General Holder issued a policy memorandum
for all Department components (including the FBI) entitled
*Communications with Congress and the White House* ("May 2009 Memo"). In
addressing pending criminal investigations and cases, the May 2009 Memo
explained that the heads of investigative agencies, tasked with the
primary duty of initiating and supervising cases, "must be insulated
from influences that should not affect decisions in particular
criminal.cases." The May 2009 Memo continues that for communications
with Congress, consistent with "policies, laws, regulations, or
professional ethical obligations.and consistent with the need to
avoid publicity that may undermine a particular investigation,"
congressional inquiries related to pending criminal investigations and
cases "should be directed to the Attorney

General or DAG."^[^21^](#fn21){#fnref21 .footnote-ref}^

On August 17, 2009, then Attorney General Holder issued an updated memo
("August 2009 Memo") entitled *Communications with Congress.* The August
2009

Memo clarified that all inquiries from congressional officials should be
directed to DOJ OLA. The August 2009 Memo also spelled out that "all
communications between the Department and Congress.should be managed
by OLA to ensure that relevant Department interests and other Executive
Branch interests are protected."

"Components should not communicate with members, committees, or
congressional staff without advance coordination with OLA." The August
2009 Memo concluded with direction for component heads to contact DOJ
OLA for any questions on the policy.^[^22^](#fn22){#fnref22
.footnote-ref}^

**2. The Linder Letter**

In a January 2000 letter from the Department's AAG for OLA to then
Congressman John Linder ("Linder letter"), the Department described in
detail the principles that guide OLA and the Department in their
decision to disclose or withhold information from Congress. The letter
remains a reference guide for OLA.

The Linder letter lays out "governing principles" to foster "improved
communications and sensitivity between the Executive and Legislative
Branches regarding our respective institutional needs and interests."
After discussing the general tension between the interests of the two
branches, the Linder letter examines the "inherent threat to the
integrity of the Department's law enforcement and litigation functions"
that comes from congressional inquiries during pending investigations.
The letter noted that this concern was "especially significant with
respect to ongoing law enforcement investigations." It then described
the

Department's longstanding policy, "dating back to the beginning of the
20th Century," to decline to provide congressional committees with
access to open law enforcement files. One risk, according to the letter,
is the possible public perception that such congressional inquiries
amount to pressure resulting in "undue political and Congressional
influence over law enforcement and litigation decisions." Another risk
is the "severe damage" to the reputations of those mentioned in
disclosure of information on open matters, "even though the case might
ultimately not warrant prosecution or other legal action."

Finally, even when an investigation results in a declination, the Linder
letter explains that the disclosure of information contained in such a
declination memorandum "would implicate significant individual privacy
interests as well." Such information "often contains unflattering
personal information as well as assessments of witness credibility and
legal positions. The disclosure of the contents of these documents could
be devastating to the individuals they discuss."

**V. Special Counsel Regulations**

Since the 1999 lapse of the Independent Counsel Reauthorization Act,

Department regulations govern the process of appointing a special
counsel. 28 U.S.C. §§ 591-599, 64 Fed. Reg. 37,038 (1999). According to
28 C.F.R. § 600.1, the Attorney General (or Acting Attorney General) may
appoint a special counsel for the criminal investigation of a person or
matter when it would be in the public interest and there exists a
Department conflict of interest or other extraordinary circumstance.

The regulations provide that the Attorney General need not appoint a
special counsel immediately when a possible conflict emerges. Instead,
the Attorney

General may authorize further investigation or mitigation efforts, such
as recusal. *See* 28 C.F.R. § 600.2. The special counsel must come from
outside the government.^[^23^](#fn23){#fnref23 .footnote-ref}^ *See* 28
C.F.R. § 600.3. The Attorney General sets the criminal jurisdiction of
the special counsel through a "specific factual statement of the matter
to be investigated," though the Attorney General may authorize the
additional areas of investigation.^[^24^](#fn24){#fnref24
.footnote-ref}^ 28 C.F.R. §§ 600.3-600.4. Day to day, the special
counsel is not subject to Department supervision, but the Attorney
General maintains the ability to review and overrule special counsel
decisions in certain circumstances. 28 C.F.R. § 600.7.

**VI. Criminal Statutes Relevant to the Midyear Investigation**

Four statutes governing the handling and retention of classified
information are relevant to the Midyear investigation: 18 U.S.C. §§
793(d), 793(e), 793(f), and 1924.^[^25^](#fn25){#fnref25 .footnote-ref}^
Section 793(f)(1), which prohibits the grossly negligent removal of
"national defense information," became a central focus of the
investigation and of subsequent prosecutive decisions. In addition to
the mishandling and retention statutes, prosecutors also considered
whether former Secretary Clinton or others violated 18 U.S.C. § 2071, a
criminal statute prohibiting the willful concealment, removal, or
destruction of federal records, in connection with the deletion of
emails. We discuss the Department's analysis of these statutes in
Chapter Seven.

**A. Mishandling and Retention of Classified Information**

**1. 18 U.S.C. §§ 793(d) and (e)**

Sections 793(d) and (e) are felony statutes that apply to the willful
mishandling and retention of classified information. Section 793(d)
governs the mishandling of classified documents or information by
individuals who are authorized to possess it --- that is, who have the
appropriate security clearance and require access to the specific
classified information to perform or assist in a lawful and authorized
governmental function ("need to know").^[^26^](#fn26){#fnref26
.footnote-ref}^ Section 793(d) provides:

Whoever, lawfully having possession of, access to, control over, or
being entrusted with any document, writing, code book, signal book,
sketch, photograph, photographic negative, blueprint, plan, map, model,
instrument, appliance, or note relating to the national defense, or
information relating to the national defense which information the
possessor has reason to believe could be used to the injury of the
United States or to the advantage of any foreign nation, willfully
communicates, delivers, transmits or causes to be communicated,
delivered, or transmitted or attempts to communicate, deliver, transmit
or cause to be communicated, delivered or transmitted the same to any
person not entitled to receive it, or willfully retains the same and
fails to deliver it on demand to the officer or employee of the United
States entitled to receive it.is subject to a criminal fine or
imprisonment.

Thus, to prove a violation of Section 793(d), the government must
establish the following:

- The individual lawfully had possession of documents or "information
    relating to the national defense;"
- If information, he or she had reason to believe that the information
    could be used to the injury of the United States or to the advantage
    of a foreign nation; and
- The individual willfully communicated, delivered, or transmitted the
    document or information to a person not entitled to receive it, or
    willfully retained the document or information and failed to deliver
    it to the officer or employee of the United States entitled to
    receive it.

Section 793(e) addresses the possession and transmission of classified
information by persons who are not authorized to possess it, either
because they lacked the requisite security clearance and need to know,
or because they exceeded the scope of their authorization by removing
classified materials from a secure facility.^[^27^](#fn27){#fnref27
.footnote-ref}^ Apart from this distinction, Sections 793(d) and 793(e)
are substantially identical.

*Information Relating to the National Defense*

Both 793(d) and 793(e) apply to individuals who possess documents or
"information relating to the national defense." This term is not defined
in the statute. Courts have not limited this phrase to any specific
subject matter, but the Fourth Circuit has held that the government must
establish first that the information is "closely held by the
government," and second, that its "disclosure would be potentially
damaging to the United States or useful to an enemy of the United
States." *United States* v. *Rosen*, 445 F. Supp. 2d 602, 618, 620-21
(E.D. Va. 2006) (*Rosen I*) (*citing* *Gorin* v. *United States*, 312
U.S. 19 (1941)); *United*

*States* v. *Morison*, 844 F.2d 1057, 1073 (4th Cir. 1988); *United
States* v. *Truong*, 629 F.2d 908, 918-19 (4th Cir. 1980); *United
States* v. *Heine*, 151 F.2d 813, 817 (2d Cir. 1945).

The classification level of information may be "highly probative of
whether the information at issue is 'information relating to the
national defense' and whether the person to whom they disclosed the
information was 'entitled to receive' it."^[^28^](#fn28){#fnref28
.footnote-ref}^ However, classification level does not conclusively
establish that a document or information is "information relating to the
national defense." In *United States* v. *Rosen*, 599 F. Supp. 2d 690,
694-95 (E.D. Va. 2009) (*Rosen II*), the court stated that the term
"information relating to the national defense" is not synonymous with
classified information. While the classification level of information
may serve as evidence that the government intended that it be closely
held, the defendant can rebut the conclusion by showing that the
government in fact failed to hold it closely. The court also stated that
the classification level could not be introduced to show that
unauthorized disclosure of the information might potentially damage the
United States or aid an enemy of the United
States.^[^29^](#fn29){#fnref29 .footnote-ref}^

*Willfulness*

Sections 793(d) and (e) both require that the prohibited act be done
"willfully." Courts have interpreted "willfully" to mean an act done
"intentionally and purposely and with the intent to do something the law
forbids, that is, with the bad purpose to disobey or to disregard the
law."^[^30^](#fn30){#fnref30 .footnote-ref}^

In *Rosen I*, the court held that to prove that the defendants
"willfully" committed the conduct prohibited under Sections 793(d) and
(e), the government is required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt:

That the defendants knew the information was NDI information
relating to the national defense, *i.e.,* that the information was
closely held by the United States and that disclosure of this
information might potentially harm the United States, and that the
persons to whom the defendants communicated the information were not
entitled under the classification regulations to receive the
information. Further the government must prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that the defendants communicated the information they had received from
their government sources with "a bad purpose either to disobey or to
disregard the law." It follows, therefore, that if the defendants, or
either of them, were truly unaware that the information they are alleged
to have received and disclosed was classified, or if they were truly
ignorant of the classification scheme governing who is entitled to
receive the information, they cannot be held to have violated the
statute.^[^31^](#fn31){#fnref31 .footnote-ref}^

*Additional Burden of Proof for Disclosures of Intangible Information*

Courts have held that Sections 793(d) and (e) contain a "heightened" or

"additional" *mens rea* requirement where the transmission of intangible
information (as contrasted with the retention or transmission of
classified documents) is involved.^[^32^](#fn32){#fnref32
.footnote-ref}^ In addition to showing that an individual acted
willfully, the government must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he
or she possessed "reason to believe that the information could be used
to the injury of the United States or to the advantage of a foreign
nation."^[^33^](#fn33){#fnref33 .footnote-ref}^

*Vagueness Challenges*

The term "information relating to the national defense" in Sections
793(d) and (e) repeatedly has been challenged as unconstitutionally
vague. Courts have rejected such challenges because the statute requires
the government to prove that an individual "willfully" committed the
prohibited conduct, a requirement that "eliminates any genuine risk
of holding a person 'criminally responsible for conduct which he could
not reasonably understand to be proscribed.'"^[^34^](#fn34){#fnref34
.footnote-ref}^

**2. 18 U.S.C. § 793(f)**

Section 793(f)(1), known as the gross negligence provision, became a
central focus in the controversy over the decision not to recommend
prosecution of former Secretary Clinton or her senior aides, and former
Director Comey's public statement on July 5, 2016. Below we discuss the
statutory requirements under Section 793(f), the Midyear prosecutors'
interpretation of Section 793(f)(1), and previous cases in which
prosecution was declined under the gross negligence provision.

**a. Statutory Requirements**

Section 793(f) provides as follows:

Whoever, being entrusted with or having lawful possession or control of
any document, writing, code book, signal book, sketch, photograph,
photographic negative, blueprint, plan, map, model, instrument,
appliance, note, or information, relating to the national defense, (1)
through gross negligence permits the same to be removed from its proper
place of custody or delivered to anyone in violation of his trust, or to
be lost, stolen, abstracted, or destroyed, or (2) having knowledge that
the same has been illegally removed from its proper place of custody or
delivered to anyone in violation of its trust, or lost, or stolen,
abstracted, or destroyed, and fails to make prompt report of such loss,
theft, abstraction, or destruction to his superior officer.is
subject to a criminal fine or imprisonment.

Section 793(f)(1) addresses the removal, delivery, loss, theft,
abstraction, or destruction of any document or "information relating to
the national defense" through gross negligence, while Section 793(f)(2)
penalizes the failure to report the removal, loss, theft, abstraction,
or destruction of any document or "information relating to the national
defense," if an individual has knowledge that it has been removed from
its proper place of custody.

Section 793(f), like sections 793(d) and (e), requires that the
information in question be "information relating to the national
defense." In *United States* v. *Dedeyan*, 584 F.2d 36, 39 (4th Cir.
1978), the Fourth Circuit upheld jury instructions in a Section
793(f)(2) case that required the government to prove that "disclosure of
information in the document would be potentially damaging to the
national defense, or that information in the document disclosed might be
useful to an enemy of the United States."

**b. Prosecutors' Interpretation of the "Gross**

**Negligence" Provision in Section 793(f)(1)**

Section 793(f)(1) does not define what constitutes "gross negligence,"
nor have any federal court decisions interpreted this specific provision
of the statute. However, the prosecutors analyzed the legislative
history of Section 793(f)(1) and identified statements made during the
1917 congressional debate indicating that the state of mind required for
a violation of Section 793(f)(1) is "so gross as to almost suggest
deliberate intention," criminally reckless, or "something that falls
just a little short of being willful." The prosecutors cited a statement
by Congressman Andrew Volstead during the 1917 debate about the
predecessor to Section 793(f)(1):

I want to call attention to the fact that the information that is
covered by this section may be, and probably would be, of the very
highest importance to the Government.. It is not an unusual provision
at all. It occurs in a great many criminal statutes. Men are convicted
for gross negligence, but it has to be so gross as almost to suggest
deliberate intention before a jury will convict. For instance, a person
is killed by a man running an automobile recklessly on a crowded street.
He may, and under the laws of most States would be, adjudged guilty of
manslaughter, and can be sent to State prison.. We have, as I have
already stated, a number of statutes of that kind. This provision is not
revolutionary. It is the ordinary practice to apply such statutes to
cases where lack of care occasions the death or serious injury of
persons. This section should be, and probably would be, applied only in
those cases where something of real consequence ought to be guarded with
extreme care and caution.^35^

Given the absence of a definition of "gross negligence" in Section
793(f), the prosecutors researched state manslaughter statutes in effect
at the time of the 1917 congressional debate, and determined that gross
negligence was interpreted in that context to require wantonness or
recklessness that was equivalent to criminal intent. However, the
prosecutors also identified contemporaneous state court decisions
interpreting other criminal statutes using "gross negligence" to require
proof that ranged from something more than civil negligence to willful,
intentional conduct.

The Midyear prosecutors did not find any court cases addressing the
state of mind required for a violation of Section 793(f)(1). However,
the prosecutors analyzed *United States* v. *Dedeyan*, 584 F.2d 36, 39
(4th Cir. 1978), a Fourth Circuit decision interpreting Section
793(f)(2). This case involved a civilian employee who completed a
military vulnerability analysis and marked it "Secret," then took a copy
of it home to proofread. While at home, his cousin secretly photographed
part of the analysis with a camera provided by the Soviet Union. When
the defendant later learned that his cousin had taken these photos, he
accepted \$1,000 as a "payment for remaining silent" rather than
reporting that the information had been compromised. Upholding the
statute against a challenge that it was unconstitutionally vague, the
court held that Section 793(f)(2) requires the government to prove that
the defendant knew that the document had been illegally abstracted, and
that this knowledge requirement was sufficient to save the statute from
vagueness.

In addition, the Midyear prosecutors reviewed previous prosecutions
under Section 793(f)(1) in federal or military courts and concluded that
these cases involved either a defendant who knowingly removed classified
information from a secure facility, or inadvertently removed classified
information from a secure facility and, upon learning of its removal,
failed to report its "loss, theft, abstraction, or destruction."^36^ The
prosecutors concluded that based on case law and the

35. 65 Cong. Rec. H1762-63 (daily ed. May 3, 1917).
36. *See* Indictment, *United States* v. *Smith*, No. 03-CR-429 (C.D.
    Cal filed Feb. 24, 2004); *see also United States* v. *Courpalais*,
    No. ACM 35571, 2005 WL 486145 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. Feb. 10, 2005)
    (defendant removed four classified photographs and took them home);
    *United States* v. *Roller*, 37 M.J. 1093 (1993) (defendant
    inadvertently placed two classified documents in his gym bag and
    took them home, and left the documents in his garage when he later
    discovered them); *United States* v. *Chattin*, 33 M.J. 802 (1991)
    (defendant stuffed classified documents down his pants and took them
    home); *United States* v. *Gaffney*, 17 M.J. 565 (1983) (defendant
    was supposed to destroy classified material but instead took it home
    and put it in a neighborhood dumpster); *United States* v.
    *Gonzalez*,

12 M.J. 747 (1981) (defendant intermingled two classified messages with
personal mail he was

Department's prior interpretation of the statute, charging a violation
of Section 793(f) likely required evidence that the individuals who sent
emails containing classified information "knowingly" included the
classified information or transferred classified information onto
unclassified systems (Section 793(f)(1)), or learned that classified
information had been transferred to unclassified systems and failed to
report it (Section 793(f)(2)). Thus, the Midyear prosecutors interpreted
the "gross negligence" provision of Section 793(f)(1) to require proof
that an individual acted with knowledge that the information in question
was classified.^37^

As noted above, sections 793(d) and (e) have survived constitutional
vagueness challenges because of the existence of a scienter requirement
in the form of the requirement to prove "willfulness." Such a challenge
has not yet been raised in a Section 793(f)(1) "gross negligence" case.
The Midyear prosecutors stated:

The government would likely face a colorable constitutional
challenge to the statute if it prosecuted an individual for committing
gross negligence who was both unaware he had removed classified
information at the time of the removal and never became aware he had
done so.. Moreover, in bringing a vagueness challenge, defense
counsel would also likely point to the significant disagreement as to
the meaning of "gross negligence."

**c. Previous Section 793(f)(1) Declinations**

The Midyear prosecutors also reviewed at least two previous
investigations where prosecution was declined under the gross negligence
provision in Section 793(f)(1). The Midyear prosecutors told us that
these declinations informed their understanding of the Department's
historical approach to Section 793(f)(1). We discuss these previous
declinations below.

*Gonzales Declination Decision*

One of these previous cases involved an OIG investigation into the
mishandling of documents containing highly classified, compartmented
information about a National Security Agency (NSA) surveillance program
by former White House Counsel and Attorney General Alberto Gonzales. In
2004, while Gonzales

carrying to a friend in Alaska, then put the message in a desk drawer in
the friend's room and forgot them); *cf. United States* v. *Oxfort*, 44
M.J. 337 (1996) (defendant removed classified messages from a Sensitive
Compartmented Information Facility (SCIF) in Japan with the intention of
passing them along to individuals who were not entitled to receive them;
although the opinion states the defendant was charged under 793(e),
prosecutors found documents referencing charges filed under Section
793(f)(1) based on the same facts); *United States* v. *McGuinness*, 33
M.J. 781 (1991) (defendant took home numerous classified items from
previous assignments and was charged under Section 793(e), but a Section
793(f)(1) conviction was set aside for statute of limitation reasons).

^37^ Proof of such knowledge would also be necessary to establish a
violation of Sections 793(d) or (e), which required proof of
"willfulness." Accordingly, as detailed below and in subsequent
chapters, the investigative team focused significant attention on
determining whether Clinton, her senior aides, and senders of emails
that contained classified information had actual knowledge of the
classified status of the information.

was the White House Counsel, he took handwritten notes memorializing a
meeting about the legality of the NSA program. The notes included
operational details about the program, including its compartmented
codeword. Although Gonzales did not mark the notes as classified, he
said that he used two envelopes to doublewrap the notes and may have
written an abbreviation for the codeword on the inner envelope. On the
outer envelope, Gonzales said that he wrote "AG -- EYES ONLY -- TOP
SECRET." He stored these notes in a safe in the West Wing of the White
House and said that he took them with him when he became the Attorney
General in February 2005. Gonzales said that he did not recall where he
stored the notes after removing them from the White House, but that he
may have taken them home. Gonzales also stored the notes and several
other documents containing TS//SCI classification markings in a safe in
the Attorney General's office that was not approved to hold such
materials.

The OIG referred investigative findings to NSD for a prosecutive
decision.

According to information reviewed by the OIG, on August 19, 2008, NSD
analyzed

Gonzales' handling of the notes under the gross negligence provision in
section 793(f)(1). NSD concluded that prosecutors likely could show that
the documents were removed from their proper place of custody, but that
the question was whether that removal constituted "gross negligence."
After discussing the legislative history of Section 793(f)(1), NSD
stated that the government likely would have to prove that Gonzales'
conduct was "criminally reckless" to establish that he acted with gross
negligence under Section 793(f)(1). NSD concluded that Gonzales'
inability to recall precisely where he stored the notes detracted from
prosecutors' ability to "show a state of mind approaching 'deliberate
intention' to remove classified documents from a secure location."

*AUSA Declination Decision*

The Midyear prosecutors also reviewed another 2008 case in which
prosecution was declined under Section 793(f)(1). This case involved an
AUSA who sent numerous boxes of documents to his personal residence in
the United States following an overseas tour as a legal attaché.
According to the prosecutors' analysis, the boxes contained a large
number of documents that were classified at the Secret and Confidential
levels. Many of these documents were organized haphazardly or were
improperly marked. The AUSA testified that he did not purposely ship
classified documents to his house, but acknowledged that it was highly
likely that the documents he shipped included some classified materials.

Interpreting section 793(f)(1), NSD stated that prosecutors likely would
be required to prove that the AUSA's conduct was "criminally reckless."
NSD identified factors suggesting that the AUSA's conduct did not rise
to the level of gross negligence, including that he testified that he
did not purposely ship classified documents to his house, and thus he
did not deliberately intend to remove the classified documents from a
secure location. In addition, the documents were not separated into
classified and unclassified categories, and they did not contain proper
classification markings in that the first few pages of certain documents
were not marked but later pages in the same document contained
classification

markings. Based on these and other factors, NSD concluded that
prosecution was not warranted.

**3. 18 U.S.C. § 1924**

Section 1924 is a misdemeanor statute that prohibits the "knowing"
removal of documents or materials containing classified information
without authority and with the "intent to retain" such documents or
materials at an unauthorized location. To establish a violation of this
statute, the government must show that an individual knowingly removed
classified materials without authority and intended to store these
materials at an unauthorized location. To remove "without authority"
means that the classified materials were removed from the controlling
agency's premises without permission.^[^35^](#fn35){#fnref35
.footnote-ref}^ Although no reported cases interpret this provision, the
Midyear prosecutors concluded that Section 1924 requires the government
to show beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant had knowledge that
the location where he or she intended to store classified material was
an "unauthorized" or "unlawful" place to retain it, citing the
legislative history, the Petraeus case we describe below, and other
previous prosecutions under this provision.

High profile cases considered by the Midyear prosecutors and by FBI
leadership involving plea agreements under Section 1924 include former
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Director David Petraeus, former
National Security Advisor Samuel "Sandy" Berger, and former CIA Director
John Deutch. In each of these cases, the defendants knew the information
at issue was classified or took actions reflecting knowledge that their
handling or storage of it was improper.

Petraeus, a retired U.S. Army General, served as the Commander of the
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan from July 2010 to
July 2011, and as the Director of the CIA from September 2011 to
November 2012. While in Afghanistan, Petraeus kept notes in black
notebooks that included information about the identities of covert
officers, war strategy, intelligence capabilities and mechanisms,
diplomatic discussions, quotes and deliberative discussions from
highlevel National Security Council meetings, and discussions with the
President. Petraeus retained these notebooks when he returned from
Afghanistan and later shared them with his biographer, Paula Broadwell,
admitting to her in a recorded conversation that the notebooks were
"highly classified" and contained "code word stuff." He also stored them
in an unlocked desk drawer in his home office. During a subsequent
investigation into his mishandling and retention of classified
information, Petraeus falsely told the FBI that he never provided or
facilitated the provision of classified information to Broadwell. In
March 2015, Petraeus pled guilty to one count under 18 U.S.C. § 1924,
and was sentenced to 2 years of probation, a \$25 special assessment,
and a \$100,000 fine.^[^36^](#fn36){#fnref36 .footnote-ref}^

Sandy Berger, the National Security Advisor under former President Bill
Clinton, visited the National Archives and Records Administration to
review documents for production to the 9/11 Commission. During his
visits, Berger concealed and removed documents by folding the documents
in his clothes, walking out of the National Archives building, and
placing them under a nearby construction trailer for later
retrieval.^40^ Berger removed a total of five copies of classified
documents, stored them in his office, and later destroyed three of them
by cutting them into small pieces and discarding them. All of these
documents were marked classified. Berger also created and removed
handwritten notes of classified material that he had reviewed, and was
aware that he removed these notes from the National Archives without
authorization. Berger pled guilty to a criminal information charging one
count of 18 U.S.C. § 1924.^41^ He was sentenced to 2 years of probation,
a \$56,905.52 fine, a \$25 special assessment, and 100 hours of
community service, and was precluded from accessing classified
information for 5 years.

Former CIA Director John Deutch was investigated for using unclassified,
Internet-connected computer systems to create and process classified
documents and storing classified memory cards in his personal residence.
During an investigation by the CIA Inspector General (CIA IG),
investigators recovered files from a computer at Deutch's residence that
were labeled as unclassified but contained words indicating that the
information was "Secret" or "Top Secret Codeword," or was otherwise
highly sensitive. For example, recovered documents included reports on
covert operations, communications intelligence, memoranda to then
President Bill Clinton, and classified CIA budget information. The CIA
IG report states that Deutch told investigators that he "fell into the
habit" of using the unclassified system "in an inappropriate fashion,"
and admitted that he had intentionally created highly sensitive
documents on unclassified computers. In addition, witnesses testified
that Deutch was considered to be an "expert" or "fairly advanced"
computer user. Following a criminal investigation, Deutch agreed to
plead guilty to one count under 18 U.S.C. § 1924, but was pardoned by
President Clinton on January 19, 2001, before the plea was consummated.

Examples of conduct prosecuted under Section 1924 include a former
government employee who stored boxes of marked classified documents in
his personal residence; a contractor who downloaded classified
information from a secure network to a thumb drive, transferred the
information to an unclassified computer, and shared it with others; and
a government employee who concealed and removed highly classified
documents from a Sensitive Compartmented

intent to retain such documents and materials at unauthorized locations,
aware that these locations were unauthorized for the storage and
retention of such classified documents").

40. *See* National Archives, *Notable Thefts from the National
    Archives*, *at*
    https://www.archives.gov/research/recover/notable-thefts.html
    (accessed Mar. 1, 2018).
41. *See* Factual Basis for Plea, *United States* v. *Berger*, Crim. No.
    1:05-MJ-00175-DAR (D.D.C. filed Apr. 1, 2005).

Information Facility (SCIF) where he worked and stored the documents in
his vehicle and house.

**B. 18 U.S.C. § 2071(a)**

Section 2071(a) is a felony statute criminalizing the concealment,
removal, or mutilation of government records filed in any public office.
To establish a violation of this provision, the government must prove
the following beyond a reasonable doubt:

- An individual concealed, removed, or destroyed a record, or
    attempted to do so, or took and carried away a record with the
    intent to do so:
- The record was filed or deposited in a public office of the United
    States; and
- The individual acted willfully and unlawfully.

The purpose of this statute is to prohibit conduct that deprives the
government of the use of its documents, such as by removing and altering
or destroying them.^[^37^](#fn37){#fnref37 .footnote-ref}^ The Midyear
prosecutors concluded that every prosecution under Section 2071 has
involved the removal or destruction of documents that had already been
filed or deposited in a public office of the United States (*i.e.*,
physical removal of a document). In addition, to fulfill the requirement
that the individual acted "willfully and unlawfully," Section 2071
requires the government to show that he or she acted intentionally, with
knowledge that he or she was breaching the
statute.^[^38^](#fn38){#fnref38 .footnote-ref}^

**CHAPTER THREE: OVERVIEW OF THE MIDYEAR INVESTIGATION**

In this chapter, we provide an overview of the Midyear investigation.
More specifically, we describe the referral and opening of the
investigation, the staffing of the investigation by the Department and
the FBI, and the investigative strategy.

**I. Referral and Opening of the Investigation**

**A. Background**

**1. Clinton's Use of Private Email Servers**

Hillary Clinton served as Secretary of State from January 21, 2009,
until

February 1, 2013. During that time, she used private email servers
hosting the

\@clintonemail.com domain to conduct official State Department
business.^[^39^](#fn39){#fnref39 .footnote-ref}^

According to FBI documents, former Secretary Clinton and her husband,
former President Bill Clinton, had a private email server in their house
in Chappaqua, N.Y., beginning in approximately 2008 (before Clinton's
tenure as Secretary of State) for use by former President Clinton's
staff. Former Secretary Clinton told the FBI that, in or around January
2009, she "directed aides.to create the clintonemail.com account,"
and that this was done "as a matter of convenience."

According to the FBI letterhead memorandum (LHM) summarizing the Midyear
investigation, Clinton used her clintonemail.com account and personal
mobile devices linked to that account for both personal and official
business throughout her tenure as Secretary of State. The LHM states
that Clinton "decided to use a personal device to avoid carrying
multiple devices." Clinton never personally used an official State
Department email account or State

Department-issued handheld device during her tenure, although there were
official State Department email accounts from which emails were sent on
her behalf.

**2. Production of Emails from the Private Email Servers to the State
Department and Subsequent Deletion of Emails by Clinton's Staff**

On September 11 and 12, 2012, terrorists attacked the U.S. Temporary
Mission Facility and a Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Annex in
Benghazi, Libya, killing four Americans.^[^40^](#fn40){#fnref40
.footnote-ref}^ On May 8, 2014, the U.S. House Select Committee on
Benghazi (House Benghazi Committee) was established to investigate the
Benghazi attack and, thereafter, sought documents from the State
Department as part of its investigation. In the summer of 2014, State
Department officials contacted Cheryl Mills, who had served as former
Secretary Clinton's Chief of Staff and Counselor, concerning the State
Department's inability to locate Clinton's and other former Secretaries'
emails to respond to Congressional requests. Mills later told the FBI
that she suggested that the State Department officials search State
Department systems for Clinton's clintonemail.com email address. In
addition, Mills told the FBI that State Department officials requested
that she produce former Secretary Clinton's emails and advised her that
it was Clinton's or Mills's "obligation to filter out personal emails
from what was provided to State."

Former Secretary Clinton asked Mills and Clinton's personal attorney,
David Kendall, to oversee the process of providing her emails to the
State Department. In late summer 2014, Mills contacted Paul Combetta, an
employee of the company that administered Clinton's private server at
the time, and requested that he transfer copies of Clinton's emails onto
Mills's laptop and a laptop belonging to Heather Samuelson, a lawyer who
had served in the State Department as Secretary Clinton's White House
Liaison. Mills, Samuelson, and Kendall then developed a methodology for
Samuelson to "cull" former Secretary Clinton's work-related emails from
her personal emails, to produce her work-related emails to the State
Department.

In October and November 2014, the State Department sent letters to four
former Secretaries of State, including Clinton, requesting that they
"make available copies of any Federal records in their possession, such
as emails sent or received on a personal email account while serving as
Secretary of State."^[^41^](#fn41){#fnref41 .footnote-ref}^ In December
2014, former Secretary Clinton produced to the State Department "from
her personal email account approximately 55,000 hard-copy pages,
representing approximately 30,000 emails that she believed related to
official business."^[^42^](#fn42){#fnref42 .footnote-ref}^ After
receiving these documents, the State Department, in addition to
responding to the House Benghazi Committee's document request, reviewed
Clinton's emails for potential public release in response to Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) requests.

As described in Chapter Five, Mills, Samuelson, and Combetta told the
FBI that in late 2014 or early 2015 Mills and Samuelson asked Combetta
to remove former Secretary Clinton's emails from their laptops. Combetta
then used the commercial software "BleachBit" to permanently remove or
wipe former Secretary Clinton's emails from Mills's and Samuelson's
laptops.^[^43^](#fn43){#fnref43 .footnote-ref}^ Mills told the FBI that
at some point between November 2014 and January 2015, Clinton decided
she no longer wished to retain on her server emails that were older than
60 days and Mills instructed Combetta to change Clinton's email
retention policy accordingly. Combetta, however, failed to do so until
late March 2015.

On March 3, 2015, the House Benghazi Committee sent preservation orders
requiring former Secretary Clinton to preserve emails on her
servers.^49^ As described in more detail in Chapter Five, Combetta told
the FBI that later in March 2015 he realized that he had neglected to
make the change to former Secretary Clinton's email retention policy
earlier that year, had an "oh shit" moment, and, without consulting
Mills, used BleachBit to permanently remove Clinton's emails from her
server. These included emails that had been transferred from a prior
server. According to FBI documents, former Secretary Clinton's attorneys
advised

Combetta about the congressional preservation order before he made the
deletions. As a result of Combetta's actions, 31,830 emails that former
Secretary Clinton's attorneys had deemed personal in nature were deleted
from three locations on which they had previously been stored---Mills's
and Samuelson's laptops and the Clinton server.

**B. State Department Inspector General and IC IG Review of Clinton's
Emails and Subsequent 811 Referral**

On March 12, 2015, three Members of Congress requested that the State
Department Inspector General (State IG) conduct a review regarding State

Department employees' use of personal email for official purposes. The
Members of

Congress requested that the State IG coordinate with the Office of the
Intelligence Community Inspector General (IC IG) to determine whether
classified information was transmitted or received by State Department
employees over personal systems. Following this request, the IC IG
reviewed 296 of the 30,490 emails that former Secretary Clinton's
attorneys had provided to the State Department and determined that at
least two of these emails contained classified information. The 296
emails, including the two determined to contain classified information,
had already been publicly released by State Department FOIA officials.

In a June 24, 2015 letter, Kendall told the State IG and the IC IG that
a copy of the 30,490 emails provided by former Secretary Clinton to the
State Department was stored on a thumb drive in his law office and that
her personal server was in the custody of the company "Platte River
Networks" ("PRN"). Based on this information, the IC IG concluded that
"the thumb drive and personal server contain classified information and
are not currently in the Government's possession."

On July 6, 2015, the IC IG made a referral to the FBI pursuant to
Section 811(c) of the Intelligence Authorization Act of Fiscal Year 1995
(811 referral). This provision requires Executive Branch departments and
agencies to advise the FBI "immediately of any information, regardless
of its origin, which indicates that

^49^ *See* U.S. House of Representatives, Select Committee on the Events
Surrounding the 2012

Terrorist Attack in Benghazi, *Final Report of the Select Committee on
the Events Surrounding the*

*2012 Terrorist Attack in Benghazi*, 114th Cong., 2d sess., 2016, H.
Rept. 114-848,

https://www.congress.gov/congressional-report/114th-congress/house-report/848/1
(accessed May 7,

classified information is being, or may have been, disclosed in an
unauthorized manner to a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power,"
and is typically used to refer to the FBI a loss or unauthorized
disclosure of classified information. The IC IG referred the matter to
the FBI "for any action you deem appropriate."

**C. FBI's Decision to Open a Criminal Investigation**

On July 10, 2015, the FBI Counterintelligence Division opened a criminal
investigation in response to the 811 referral from the IC IG. Although
only a small percentage of 811 referrals result in criminal
investigations, witnesses told the OIG that a criminal investigation was
necessary to determine the extent of classified information on former
Secretary Clinton's private server, who was responsible for introducing
the information into an unclassified system, and why it was placed
there. The FBI gave the investigation the code name "Midyear Exam,"
choosing it from a list of randomly generated names.

The FBI predicated the opening of the investigation on the possible
compromise of highly sensitive classified secure compartmented
information (SCI). One of the Midyear case agents told us that the
Midyear investigative team was focused at the outset on the "potential
unauthorized storage of classified information on an unauthorized system
and then where it might have gotten sic from there." A Department
prosecutor assigned to the investigation similarly described the scope
of the investigation as "related to the email systems used by Secretary
Clinton, and whether on her private email server there are individuals
who improperly retained or transmitted classified information."

The FBI designated the Midyear investigation as a Sensitive
Investigative Matter (SIM). According to the DIOG, a SIM includes "an
investigative matter involving the activities of a domestic public
official or domestic political candidate (involving corruption or a
threat to the national security)" as well as "any other matter which, in
the judgment of the official authorizing an Assessment, should be
brought to the attention of FBI Headquarters and other DOJ
officials." FBI witnesses told us that the SIM designation is typically
given to investigations involving sensitive categories of persons such
as attorneys, judges, clergy, journalists, and politicians, and that
that SIM investigations are overseen more closely by FBI management and
the FBI Office of General Counsel than other investigations.

The Midyear investigation was opened with an "Unknown Subject(s)
(UNSUB)," and at no time during the investigation was any individual
identified by the FBI as a subject or target of the investigation,
including former Secretary Clinton. FBI witnesses told us that the
"UNSUB" designation is common and means that the FBI has not identified
a specific target or subject at the outset of an investigation.
According to FBI witnesses, this allowed the FBI to expand the focus of
the investigation based on the evidence without being "locked into a
particular subject." With respect to the Midyear investigation,
witnesses told the OIG that the FBI did not identify anyone as a subject
or target during the investigation because it was unclear how the
classified material had been introduced to the server and who was
responsible for improperly placing it there.

Despite the UNSUB designation, witnesses told us that a primary focus of
the Midyear investigation was on former Secretary Clinton's intent in
setting up and using her private email server. An FBI OGC attorney
assigned to the Midyear team (FBI Attorney 1) told the OIG, "We
certainly started looking more closely at the

Secretary because they were her emails." Randall Coleman, the former
Assistant Director of the Counterintelligence Division, stated, "I don't
know why that was the case, why it was UNSUB. I'm really shocked
that it would have stayed that way because certainly the investigation
started really kind of getting more focused."

In his OIG interview, Comey described former Secretary Clinton as the
subject of the Midyear investigation and stated that he was unaware that
the investigation had an UNSUB designation. Similarly, in his book,
Comey referred to former Secretary Clinton as the subject of the Midyear
investigation, stating that one question the investigation sought to
answer was what Clinton was thinking "when she mishandled that
classified information."^[^44^](#fn44){#fnref44 .footnote-ref}^

**D. Initial Briefing for the Department**

On July 23, 2015, Coleman and then Deputy Director Mark as' met with

Deputy Attorney General (DAG) Sally Yates and Principal Associate Deputy
Attorney General (PADAG) Matt Axelrod to brief them on the opening of
the Midyear investigation. According to Coleman, he and Giuliano told
Yates and Axelrod why the Midyear investigation was opened and laid out
their vision of how the investigation would be conducted, including that
the FBI planned to run the investigation out of headquarters.

Yates recalled being briefed by Giuliano and Coleman at the beginning of
the Midyear investigation, but said that she did not recall having
concerns about the information they presented at the meeting or
remembering anything significant about it. Axelrod told the OIG that
Giuliano and Coleman showed them a copy of the 811 referral that the FBI
had received, and either showed them or told them about some of the
emails that had been identified as potentially classified. Axelrod
stated:

That, my recollection is that the way they explained it was that review
of the certain emails contained on the personal server that Secretary
Clinton had been using showed that some of those emails contained
classified information. And so that, and that they, one of the things
that was sort of standard practice when there was classified information
on non-classified systems was that a review needed to be done to sort of
contain the, I think the word they use in the

intelligence community is a spill.... The spill of classified
information out into sort of a non-classified arena. And so that
they needed to, this was a referral so that the Bureau could help
contain the spill and identify if there was classified information on
non-classified systems so that that classified information could be
contained and either, you know, destroyed or returned to proper
information handling mechanisms.

Asked whether he considered the Midyear investigation to be criminal as
of the date of this initial briefing, Axelrod replied, "Not in my view."
According to Axelrod, "it was some time.before I, at least I
understood that it had morphed into a criminal investigation."

The prosecutors and career Department staff assigned to the Midyear
investigation told us that they considered it a criminal investigation
from early on. Deputy Assistant Attorney General (DAAG) George Toscas,
who was the most senior career Department official involved in the daily
supervision of the investigation, told us that he approached it as a
criminal investigation from the beginning of NSD's involvement.
Prosecutors 1 and 2, both of whom were assigned to the investigation by
late July 2015, understood that it was a criminal investigation from
very early in the investigation. Prosecutor 1 told us, "I mean, pretty
quickly this seemed like a, a criminal investigation.... It looked,
looked and it smelled like a criminal investigation to me."

**II. Staffing the Midyear Investigation**

**A. FBI Staffing**

The Midyear investigation was conducted by the FBI's Counterintelligence
Division. For the first few weeks, the investigation was staffed by FBI
Headquarters personnel and temporary duty assignment (TDY) FBI agents.
Thereafter, FBI management decided to run the investigation as a
"special" out of FBI

Headquarters. This meant that the investigation was staffed by
counterintelligence agents and analysts from the FBI Washington Field
Office (WFO) who were temporarily located to headquarters and received
support from headquarters personnel. FBI management selected WFO
personnel based on WFO's geographic proximity to headquarters and its
experience conducting sensitive counterintelligence investigations. FBI
witnesses told us that previous sensitive investigations also had been
run as "specials," and that this allowed FBI senior executives to
exercise tighter control over the investigation.

There were approximately 15 agents, analysts, computer specialists, and
forensic accountants assigned on a full-time basis to the Midyear team,
as well as other FBI staff who provided periodic support. Four WFO
agents served as the Midyear case agents and reported to a WFO
Supervisory Special Agent ("SSA"). Several FBI witnesses described the
SSA as an experienced and aggressive agent, and the SSA told us that he
selected the "four strongest agents" from his WFO squad to be on the
Midyear team.

The SSA reported to Peter Strzok, who was then an Assistant Special
Agent in Charge (ASAC) at WFO.^[^45^](#fn45){#fnref45 .footnote-ref}^
Comey and Coleman told us that Strzok was selected to lead the Midyear
investigative team because he was one of the most experienced and
highly-regarded counterintelligence investigators within the FBI.

There were also several analysts on the Midyear team. Some analysts
assigned to Midyear were on the review team, which reviewed and analyzed
former

Secretary Clinton's emails. These analysts reported to a Supervisory
Intelligence

Analyst, who in turn reported to the Lead Analyst. FBI witnesses,
including Coleman, told us that the Lead Analyst was highly regarded
within the FBI and very experienced in counterintelligence
investigations. Other analysts were on the investigative team, which
assisted the agents with interview preparation and performed other
investigative tasks. These analysts reported to the SSA and Strzok, in
addition to reporting directly to the Lead Analyst. Several analysts
were on both the review and investigative teams.

Until approximately the end of 2015, the Lead Analyst and Strzok both
reported to a Section Chief in the Counterintelligence Division, who in
turn reported to Coleman for purposes of the Midyear
investigation.^[^46^](#fn46){#fnref46 .footnote-ref}^ The remainder of
the reporting chain was as follows: Coleman to John Giacalone, who was
Executive Assistant Director (EAD) of the National Security Branch;
Giacalone to DD Giuliano; and DD Giuliano to Director Comey.

During the course of the investigation, some FBI officials involved with
the Midyear investigation retired or changed positions. In late 2015,
Coleman became the EAD of the FBI Criminal, Cyber, Response, and
Services Branch and was no longer involved in the Midyear investigation.
At the same time, E.W. ("Bill")

Priestap replaced Coleman as AD of the Counterintelligence Division. EAD
Giacalone and DD Giuliano retired from the FBI in early 2016 and were
replaced by Michael Steinbach and Andrew McCabe, respectively.

In addition, Lisa Page, who was Special Counsel to McCabe, became
involved in the Midyear investigation after McCabe became the Deputy
Director in February 2016. Page told the OIG that part of her function
was to serve as a liaison between the Midyear team and McCabe. Page
acknowledged that her role upset senior FBI officials, but told the OIG
that McCabe relied on her to ensure that he had the information he
needed to make decisions, without it being filtered through multiple
layers of management. Several witnesses told the OIG that Page
circumvented the official chain of command, and that Strzok communicated
important Midyear case information to her, and thus to McCabe, without
Priestap's or Steinbach's knowledge. McCabe said that he was aware of
complaints about Page, and that he valued her ability to "spot issues"
and bring them to his attention when others did not do so.

The FBI Office of General Counsel (OGC) assigned FBI Attorney 1, who was
a supervisory attorney in the National Security and Cyber Law Branch
(NSCLB), to provide legal support to the Midyear team. A second, more
junior attorney (FBI Attorney 2) also was assigned to the Midyear team.
FBI Attorney 1 reported to

Deputy General Counsel Trisha Anderson, who in turn reported to then
General

Counsel James Baker.^[^47^](#fn47){#fnref47 .footnote-ref}^

Figure 3.1 describes the FBI chain of command for the Midyear
investigation. This figure does not include intervening supervisors who
had limited involvement in the investigation.

![](Pictures/10000000000004C800000630DB1C227154ED7902.jpg)

**B. Department Staffing**

Within the Department, the Midyear investigation was primarily handled
by the Counterintelligence and Export Control Section (CES) of the
National Security Division (NSD), with support from two prosecutors in
the United States Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of Virginia
(EDVA). All of the prosecutors assigned to the Midyear team had
significant experience handling national security investigations or
white collar criminal cases.

The lead prosecutor (Prosecutor 1) was a supervisory attorney in CES.

Prosecutor 1 told us that he selected the "best" nonsupervisory line
attorney within CES (Prosecutor 2) to handle the Midyear investigation
with him. The two CES prosecutors reported directly to the Chief of CES,
David Laufman, who in turn reported to DAAG George Toscas. Toscas was
the highest level career Department employee involved in the Midyear
investigation, and the prosecutors and supervisors below him who were
involved in the Midyear investigation were also career employees. As
described in more detail below, Department officials above Toscas,
including then Assistant Attorney General (AAG) John Carlin, Axelrod,
Yates, and Lynch, received briefings about the Midyear investigation but
were not involved in its day-to-day management.

In August 2015, EDVA was brought into the Midyear investigation. EDVA
assigned two supervisory attorneys to work with the CES prosecutors:
Prosecutor 3 and Prosecutor 4. The role of the EDVA prosecutors
initially was to facilitate the issuance of legal process, including
grand jury subpoenas, search warrants, and 2703(d) orders. However, the
NSD prosecutors told the OIG that ultimately they consulted and worked
closely with the EDVA prosecutors on many issues and decisions
throughout the course of the Midyear investigation. Prosecutor 3
similarly told us that as the investigation progressed, he and
Prosecutor 4 were considered "equal partners" with the NSD prosecutors.

EDVA senior leadership, including then U.S. Attorney Dana Boente,
received briefings on the Midyear investigation from the EDVA
prosecutors and were informed of significant developments, but they were
not involved in investigative decisions. Axelrod told the OIG that he
recalled that he spoke to Boente early in the Midyear investigation and
"let them know that this was NSD's investigation." Axelrod stated:

Sometimes when you have a U.S. Attorney's office and a Main Justice
component, you know, things have to go up two chains and.that's
cumbersome.. In.an investigation like this we figured it was
easier just to have everything centralized in NSD. There's a reason why
NSD has the ticket on, you know, all these matters, right? They're the
subject matter experts.

Axelrod explained that NSD has primary responsibility for
counterterrorism and counterintelligence cases not only because it has
subject matter expertise in those areas, but also because those cases
are nationwide. He stated that there are certain areas of law where it
is important to ensure nationwide consistency in how the law is applied,
because if "one district does something really different than another
district it can have very bad.ramifications or consequences." As
noted previously, the USAM requires NSD to expressly approve in advance
charges involving certain national security statutes, including those
that were considered in this investigation.

Prosecutor 2 stated that NSD's typical role varies from case to case,
and depends on the resources and experience of the specific U.S.
Attorney's Office. This prosecutor told the OIG that NSD typically
"drives" counterintelligence cases, but that its role "runs the gamut"
from taking the lead on cases to playing a supporting role. Prosecutor 2
stated that EDVA has been more willing to allow NSD attorneys to play an
active role in charged cases and is "very open to NSD's partnership
and support."

Prosecutor 3 similarly told the OIG that EDVA's supporting role in the
Midyear investigation was unusual, but he attributed this to logistics.
This prosecutor stated, "Prosecutors 1 and 2 were right across the
street from FBI

Headquarters.. It was pretty work intensive, more so for them
because they would have to go over there at the drop of a hat for
meetings. You know, we were always kept in the loop of what was going
on. But the FBI kept a pretty tight hold of the classified
documents." Prosecutor 3 also said that running the case out of NSD,
supervised by Toscas, allowed the Department to keep "one central
location of control by a career person over the investigation."

Several witnesses told us that the FBI was frustrated at the perceived
slow pace of bringing a U.S. Attorney's Office into the Midyear
investigation. However, Toscas told us that it is not unusual for a U.S.
Attorney's Office not to be involved in the beginning of an
investigation, and that it took some time to determine the proper venue
and select the most appropriate U.S. Attorney's Office. Prosecutor 1
told us that although the U.S. Attorney's Office for the District of
Columbia also was considered, EDVA was selected in part based on the
good historical working relationship between NSD and EDVA.

Boente told the OIG that he expressed concerns that EDVA was not the
appropriate district given that former Secretary Clinton lived in New
York. He said that they potentially could establish venue through an
email server or victim agency server located in EDVA, but that it would
be unusual to select venue to prosecute a high-profile public figure on
that basis. Boente said that while no one explained why the Department
chose EDVA, he assumed that it was because "we move quicker and do
things a lot quicker than some districts can."

**III. Role of Senior FBI and Department Leadership in the
Investigation**

**A. FBI Leadership**

The Midyear investigation was closely supervised by FBI leadership from
the outset. Comey told the OIG that he received frequent briefings on
the Midyear investigation:

And then once it got underway, either in July or maybe in August
2015, I told them I wanted to be briefed on it on a much more
frequent basis then I would normally on a case because I was keen to
make sure that they had the resources they need and that there was
no---that I could both support them if they needed additional things and
protect them in the event anybody outside of the investigative team
tried to monkey with them in any way or exert any pressure on them or
anything like that. Because I could see immediately how significant the
matter was.. So I think they got into a rhythm of briefing me maybe
every couple of weeks.

Comey said that briefings took place roughly every two to three weeks at
the beginning of the investigation, and occurred on a weekly basis as
the investigation progressed.

Comey said that the Midyear briefings typically were attended by a core
team of senior officials:

- The Deputy Director (Giuliano, then McCabe);
- Comey's Chief of Staff, James Rybicki;
- FBI OGC personnel including Baker, Anderson, and FBI Attorney 1;
- The EAD of the National Security Branch (Giacalone, then Steinbach);
- The AD of the Counterintelligence Division (Coleman, then Priestap);
- Deputy Director McCabe's counsel, Lisa Page (beginning in February
    2016); and
- Strzok and the Lead Analyst.

Other FBI officials periodically attended these briefings, including
then Associate Deputy Director (ADD) David Bowdich after his appointment
in April 2016, but witnesses told us that briefings were carefully
controlled and limited to a select group of senior FBI managers.

Comey said that the Midyear team typically produced a biweekly or weekly
written summary of their progress in the investigation, and that
briefings generally focused on what the team had completed and what
needed to be done. Comey stated, "The way it tended to break down is
the Lead Analyst would talk about exploitation of media and sorting
through emails and things. And Pete Strzok would focus on
investigative steps, interviews, things like that." Comey told the OIG:

It would typically be here in the Director's conference room at
the table and they would give me a progress report on where they were
and I would typically ask the questions that were rooted in my interest
in it to begin with which is--- do you have the resources you need? Any
problems that I can help you with? I just felt the need to stay close to
it.

As described in more detail in Chapter Six, the same officials were
involved in discussions about whether to do a public statement
announcing the closing of the Midyear investigation. Comey characterized
these discussions as "great family conversations," stating that he was a
great believer in oppositional argument and encouraged people to bring
up different points of view.

In addition to the Midyear-specific meetings, Comey and the Deputy
Director (first Giuliano, then McCabe) had daily morning and late
afternoon meetings about significant developments or issues that were
impacting the FBI. The Midyear investigation was sometimes discussed
immediately following these meetings in "sidebar" meetings involving a
smaller group of participants due to the sensitivity of the
investigation.^[^48^](#fn48){#fnref48 .footnote-ref}^

As the result of these frequent briefings, Comey and McCabe knew about
and were involved in significant investigative decisions. McCabe stated:

Comey relied on me for kind of my advice and recommendation on those
decisions. But he was very involved in the decisions on Midyear.. Not
decisions like what time is the interview with John Jones going to take
place tomorrow, but.we think we should serve a subpoena on so-and-so
for these records, and the Department of Justice is saying no, we want
to try to work it out with a letter. And so.as that conflict was
brewing, he would learn about it and weigh in on it and not necessarily
decide it. But he was up-to-speed on all of the kind of significant
things that were happening in the case.

McCabe told the OIG that although Strzok and Priestap made the
day-to-day investigative decisions, he and Comey were informed about any
problems that arose during the investigation, as well as any significant
information that the team discovered.

As described in more detail in Chapter Five, our review found examples
where Comey or McCabe approved or directed specific investigation
decisions. These included directing the Midyear agents to deliver a
preamble at the first interview of Cheryl Mills about the need to answer
questions about the process used to cull former Secretary Clinton's
personal and work-related emails, without informing the prosecutors;
authorizing Baker to contact Beth Wilkinson, counsel to Mills and
Samuelson, again without telling the prosecutors; approving the consent
and immunity agreements used to obtain the Mills and Samuelson laptops;
and not prohibiting Mills and Samuelson from attending the interview of
former Secretary Clinton as her counsel.

**B. Department Leadership**

Unlike the FBI's senior leadership, senior Department officials played a
more limited role in the Midyear investigation. Although Lynch, Yates,
Axelrod, and Carlin described making a conscious decision to allow the
career staff to handle the Midyear investigation with minimal
involvement by political appointees, they also told us that their
involvement was consistent with their normal role in criminal
investigations.

*Lynch*

Lynch told the OIG that she received limited briefings on the Midyear
investigation. She explained that the Midyear investigation was not
discussed at her morning meetings or staff meetings because it was a
sensitive matter and involved potentially classified information. Lynch
said that she had a monthly meeting with NSD, and that although the
Midyear investigation was too sensitive to discuss during that meeting,
afterward the meeting would "skinny down" to discuss sensitive cases
among a smaller group of people that included Yates, Axelrod, Carlin,
Toscas, and sometimes members of her staff. She said that the cases
discussed among this smaller group included not only the Midyear
investigation, but also other sensitive counterterrorism and classified
cases.

Lynch said that she understood that there were political sensitivities
inherent in the Midyear investigation, and she wanted to protect the
Midyear team from perceived pressure from Department leadership. She
stated:

Because we knew that it was going to be scrutinized, we wanted to make
sure that not only was the team supported, but they also were insulated
from a lot of people talking about it and just discussing it in general
throughout the office.. And so, my view was that unless you need me
for something, you know, I don't want to be on top of the team for this.
They, they should work as they always work. They should know that they
have whatever they need to have, whatever resources they need to get.
But the Front Office is not, you know, breathing down their neck on
this.

Asked whether there was ever a conscious decision by the political
appointees to step back and allow the career employees to handle the
investigation, Lynch replied:

Certainly it was my view, and I can't recall having discussions about
that. But that was how I viewed the setup, was that we wanted to make
sure that this was always handled by the career people, and that
essentially even though they would need input, and certainly toward the
end of anything you'd have to make certain decisions. But not to have,
at least certainly from.the fifth floor level where I was, not to
have that kind of input early on. Although I typically wouldn't have had
input.in the inner workings of an investigation.

Lynch said that Toscas was the most senior career Department official
involved in making decisions about the Midyear investigation, and that
she had faith and confidence in his ability to handle the case.

Lynch explained that she was not involved in the day-to-day
investigative decisions about how to staff the investigation, what
witnesses to interview, or any of the other "things that she used to
do as a line Assistant U.S. Attorney (AUSA)." Nor did she intervene
in conflicts between the prosecutors and agents. She told the OIG that
this was not unique to the Midyear investigation but rather represented
her standard practice, stating:

My view is that.whoever is, is leading the team needs to deal
with that initially because they've got to keep working with each other.
And based on my experience as an AUSA, if you can resolve it at that
level first, you will have a team that is, is, is more solid and can
work together more easily. If not, then I think the, the next level
supervisor has got to be involved in that.. My view is that the
chain of command is set up is there for that reason.

But I wouldn't, if someone said to me the agents want to interview this
person, and the prosecutors don't, my first question before I got
involved would be to say what do the supervisors think? Because if, if I
as AG, or even as U.S. Attorney immediately step in and make that
decision, then what I've done is I may have solved a problem, but I've
cut the knees off of every supervisor in between me and them. And, and
that creates bigger problems down the road.

Lynch said her view was that problems or conflicts should not be
elevated to the Attorney General unless the parties had exhausted all
other remedies.

*Yates and Axelrod*

Yates told the OIG that although Department leadership understood the
significance of the Midyear investigation, they agreed that it should be
handled like any other case. She said that the role of Department
leadership in the Midyear investigation represented their normal
approach to criminal investigations, stating:

Look, we got the sensitivity of this matter obviously even from the
beginning. And I remember we wanted to make certain that NSD had all the
resources that they needed, that they were on top of it. That we stayed
briefed on what was going on but from the very beginning it was
important to us for this to be handled like any other case would be
handled. That we wanted to make sure that the line prosecutors and
lawyers who were doing this didn't feel like they had the leadership
office breathing down their neck because that's going to put a layer of
pressure on them that is not appropriate we felt like here. So it was
important to us for NSD to be handling the day to day aspects of this.
But at the same time we wanted to make sure that they were getting what
they needed. And that we were staying apprised of significant
developments in it..

Not only doing it the right way but making sure that we did this, that
it had the appearance of doing it the right way too. And public
confidence was going to be important. We knew that from the very
beginning. And that we wanted to make sure that we had a process in
place that was going to be the right process. And that would be for NSD
to handle the day to day aspects of it. And so we had that
conversation. You know, the DAG's office is really sort of more the
operational one between the two leadership offices. And so I certainly
had conversations with the AG about how we set this up and we're running
it. But again, there was no real dispute with anybody about this. This
seemed like the natural and right way to do things..

Asked whether her role in the Midyear investigation differed at all from
her usual process, Yates replied:

Every other case is not on the radar screen of.the DAG,
obviously. But this was a significant matter for the Department that was
one of those small handful of cases that how you do it can be defining
for the Department of Justice.. And we were very aware of that from
the very beginning. So when I say we were handling it like any other
case what I mean is that we wanted to ensure that the factors that went
into a decision about how we should proceed in that matter and how, the
kind of latitude that the line people were handling had to do it in that
matter, that that should be done like any other case. Nobody should get
any special treatment. Nobody should be treated more harshly.because
of who they were. That's what I mean it should be like any other case.
But we weren't stupid. I mean, we recognized that the profile and import
of this matter was such that we needed to make sure that things were
done correctly.

Yates explained that the DAG typically gets involved in an investigation
from a decisionmaking standpoint if there is disagreement between one of
the

Department's litigating components and another government agency, or
between a Department component and a U.S. Attorney's Office, or if there
is "real uncertainty" about whether to take a potential investigative
step. She stated, "Normally the DAG's office is not running an
investigation and we weren't running this one."

Yates told the OIG that she received more frequent updates on the
Midyear investigation than she did on other cases, attributing this to
the profile and time sensitivity of the investigation. Yates told the
OIG that it was hard to generalize how frequently she received updates,
but that she had regular meetings with NSD every other week. Although
the Midyear investigation was not discussed with the larger group
present during these meetings, afterward they would "skinny down" to a
smaller group to discuss sensitive matters, including the Midyear
investigation. This smaller group included Carlin, Toscas, and Mary
McCord, who was at the time the Principal DAAG in NSD. Yates said that
she also participated in Lynch's regular meetings with NSD, which would
similarly "skinny down" at the end.

The NSD and EDVA prosecutors told the OIG that they were concerned at
various points during the Midyear investigation that there was a
disparity between the involvement of Department and FBI leadership in
discussions about investigative steps. For example, while McCabe (the
second in command at the FBI) attended meetings at which the Midyear
agents and prosecutors debated whether and how to obtain the Mills and
Samuelson laptops, the highest ranking official representing the
Department's position at those meetings was Toscas. Asked whether she
was informed of these concerns, Yates told the OIG that she was not. She
said that she was not aware that McCabe attended meetings with the
Midyear prosecutors, nor did she know that Comey was closely involved in
the investigation. Yates stated that she spoke to McCabe regularly about
various issues, and that she thought he was "relaxed enough" with her to
tell her that she needed to be at any meetings. Yates said that any
disparity resulted from the unusually high level of involvement by FBI
leadership, not a decreased role by Department leadership.

Axelrod similarly told the OIG that at the outset of the Midyear
investigation, senior Department officials "made efforts to.set up a
structure that would maintain the integrity of this matter." He
explained that they were aware that no matter how the investigation
turned out, there was likely to be criticism at the end. As a result, he
said that they considered it "extra important to make sure things
were.done.by the book, following procedures. Making sure that when
people criticized whatever the outcome was that we'd be able to say
no, this was done straight down the middle on the facts and on the law."

Axelrod said that he met with Toscas at the outset of the investigation
and explained that Toscas would be the primary supervisor over the
investigation. Axelrod stated:

We were going to have sort of a lighter touch from the leadership
offices than we might on a sort of high profile case. In other words, we
were there for him for whatever he needed. But we weren't going to be
sort of checking in day to day or week to week for updates or briefings.
When.something significant happened.that we needed to know about
he would let us know..

And I, when I say a lighter touch I don't mean that folks weren't
engaged or paying attention. I, not at all. I just mean we wanted to
give them the space they needed to do whatever they thought necessary in
the investigation. So that at the end.I just wanted to make sure that
any allegation that there was some sort of political interference with
this investigation wouldn't hold water.

Axelrod told the OIG that the difference between the role of Department
leadership in the Midyear investigation and the typical high-profile
investigation was "just a matter of degree." He said that he and Yates
relied on Toscas to bring issues to their attention at "skinny down"
sessions following the biweekly meetings with NSD, but that "it wasn't
us saying okay, and what's the latest on the email investigation?"

*Carlin*

Carlin told the OIG that NSD's standard practice is for cases to be
handled by the career staff, supervised by a DAAG. He said that at the
beginning of the Midyear investigation, he held a meeting with McCord,
Toscas, and the NSD prosecutors in which he emphasized the need to "go
more by the book" and to follow the normal procedure. Carlin said that
he wanted one person in the NSD Front Office to be in charge of the
Midyear investigation, and that he chose Toscas based on his historical
expertise with investigations involving "espionage, the straight-up a
spy cases, and the leak mishandling type portfolio."

Carlin said that he preferred having one person who was clearly
accountable and in charge. He stated:

I tend to like that as former career person.I knew what it felt like
when you're in one of those spots. So, in general, I prefer that type of
structure. In this case, I knew, as well, at the end of the day,
whatever decision was made in the case, it was going to be a highprofile
controversial decision. And so.you might need to explain later what
process do we follow at the Department. And so, I wanted to make that
clear, internally and to our partners, that this was the process we were
following.at the National Security Division.

And just, seeing some other cases in my career that were, they were high
profile. They were handled in a way than was different than the norm.
More people got involved in trying to make the day-to-day decisions. I
didn't think that that redounded to the benefit of the case. Not just
for appearance purposes, but.it also just created confusion and
frustration among the relevant teams. And kind of, inconsistencies in
how they were staffed, sometimes, when someone had a great idea later,
and came in over the top, and changed the way they were approaching the
case. So, right from the beginning, I wanted to, to set it up, and
structure.it that way. I felt pretty strongly about it.

Carlin said that he discussed this with Lynch and Yates and made it
clear to them that the team had the authority to make investigative and
prosecutorial decisions. Carlin said that he told Lynch and Yates that
"like other sensitive matters, we would periodically update them."
According to Carlin, Lynch and Yates knew that this was how Carlin was
handling the investigation and supported this structure. Carlin said
that he also explicitly communicated this to the FBI, explaining it to
both Giacalone and McCabe.

**IV. Investigative Strategy**

The Midyear team sought to determine whether any individuals were
criminally liable under the laws prohibiting the mishandling of
classified information, which are summarized in Chapter Two. To do so,
the team employed an investigative strategy that included three primary
lines of inquiry: collection and examination of the emails that
traversed former Secretary Clinton's servers and other relevant
evidence, interviews of relevant witnesses, and analysis of whether
classified information was compromised by hostile cyber
intrusions.^[^49^](#fn49){#fnref49 .footnote-ref}^

**A. Collection and Examination of Emails that Traversed Clinton's
Servers and Other Relevant Evidence**

The Midyear team sought to collect and review any emails that traversed
Clinton's servers during her tenure as Secretary of State, as well as
other evidence that would be helpful to understand classified
information contained in those emails. This included a review of the
30,490 work-related emails and attachments to those emails that former
Secretary Clinton's attorneys had produced to the State Department.

The team also attempted to recover or reconstruct the remaining 31,830
emails that Clinton's attorneys determined were personal and did not
produce to the State Department. As described above and in Chapter Five,
before the Midyear investigation began, these emails had been deleted
and "wiped" from former Secretary Clinton's then current server. The
Midyear team also believed that some work-related emails could have been
deleted from Clinton's servers before her attorneys reviewed them for
production to the State Department.

The Midyear investigators sought to recover and review deleted emails by
obtaining and forensically analyzing, among other things, Clinton's
servers and related equipment; other devices used by Clinton, such as
Blackberries and cellular telephones; laptops and other devices that had
been used to backup Clinton's emails from the server; and the laptops
used by Clinton's attorneys to cull her personal emails from her
work-related emails. The team also obtained email content or other
information from the official government or private email accounts of
certain individuals who communicated with Clinton by email, originated
the classified email chains that were ultimately forwarded to Clinton,
or transferred Clinton's emails to other locations.

As described in Chapter Five, the Midyear team did not seek to obtain
every device or the contents of every email account that it had reason
to believe a classified email traversed. Rather, the team focused the
investigation on obtaining Clinton's servers and devices. Witnesses
stated that, due to what they perceived to be systemic problems with
handling classified information at the State Department, to expand the
investigation beyond former Secretary Clinton's server systems and
devices would have prolonged the investigation for years. They further
stated that the State Department was the more appropriate agency to
remediate classified spills by its own employees.

Analysts examined both the original 30,490 emails produced by former

Secretary Clinton to the State Department and the emails recovered
through other means to identify potentially classified information. Once
the analysts identified information that they suspected to be
classified, the team sought formal classification review from government
agencies with equities in the information. The analysts also examined
the emails for evidence of criminal intent. For example, they searched
for:

- Classification markings to assess whether participants in classified
    email chains were on notice that the information contained in them
    was classified;
- Statements by former Secretary Clinton or others indicating whether
    Clinton used private servers for the purpose of evading laws
    regarding the proper handling of federal records or classified
    information;
- Statements by former Secretary Clinton or others indicating whether
    they knew that emails contained information that was
    classified---even if they were not clearly marked---when they sent
    or received them on unauthorized systems;
- Evidence as to whether former Secretary Clinton or others forwarded
    classified information to persons without proper clearances or
    without the need to know about it; and
- Documentation showing whether originators of classified emails had
    received classified information in properly marked documents before
    transferring the information to unclassified systems without
    markings.

**B. Witness Interviews**

The Midyear team told us that witness interviews covered several areas
of investigative interest. First, the team interviewed individuals
involved with setting up and administering former Secretary Clinton's
servers to understand her intent in using private servers and to assess
what measures they used to protect the servers from intrusion. These
witnesses also helped FBI analysts understand the server structures to
inform subsequent analyses. Additionally, they helped FBI investigators
identify additional sources of evidence, such as devices containing
backups of Clinton's emails.

Second, the Midyear team interviewed individuals who introduced,
transmitted, or received information on unauthorized systems, including
the originators of classified information, Clinton's aides who forwarded
the originators' emails to her, and Clinton herself. The originators
included State Department employees and employees of other government
agencies. The team interviewed these witnesses to, among other things,
assess: (1) whether they believed the information contained in the
emails was classified; (2) how or from where they originally received
the classified information (and whether based on those circumstances
they should have known that the information contained in the emails was
classified); and (3) why they sent the information on unclassified
systems.

Third, the Midyear team interviewed individuals with knowledge of how
and why 31,830 of former Secretary Clinton's emails were deleted from
her servers and other locations. The team sought to assess whether
Clinton or her attorneys deleted or directed the deletion of emails for
an improper purpose, such as to avoid FOIA or Federal Records Act (FRA)
requirements.

Fourth, the Midyear team interviewed State Department employees with
knowledge of the State Department's policies and practices regarding
federal records retention. The team sought to determine whether
Clinton's use of a private server was sanctioned by the State
Department, as well as what measures the State Department put in place
to protect Clinton's private server from intrusion.

**C. Intrusion Analysis**

The FBI also conducted intrusion analyses to determine whether any
classified information had been compromised by domestic hostile actors
or foreign adversaries. Agents and analysts specializing in forensics
examined the servers, devices, and other evidence to assess whether
unauthorized actors had attempted to log into, scan, or otherwise gain
access to the email accounts on the servers and, if so, whether their
efforts had been successful. They also examined various FBI datasets to
assess whether emails containing classified information had been
compromised.

**PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY**

BLANK
=====

**CHAPTER FOUR: DECISION TO PUBLICLY ACKNOWLEDGE THE MIDYEAR
INVESTIGATION AND REACTION TO WHITE HOUSE STATEMENTS ABOUT THE
INVESTIGATION**

In this chapter, we address the decision of the FBI and the Department
to publicly acknowledge an investigation following the public referral
from IC IG, including the allegation that former Lynch instructed former
Director Comey to refer to the Midyear investigation as a "matter." We
also discuss public statements by former President Barack Obama about
the Midyear investigation, which raised concerns about White House
influence on the investigation.

As we describe in Chapter Six, Comey cited the events set forth in this
chapter as two of the factors that influenced his decision to deliver a
public statement announcing the closing of the Midyear investigation on
July 5, 2016, without coordinating with the Department.

**I. Public Acknowledgement of the Investigation**

A.  **Statements about the Investigation in Department and FBI Letters
    to Congress in August and September 2015**

Following the public referral to the FBI from the IC IG in July 2015,
the Department and the FBI received questions from the media and
Congress asking whether they had opened a criminal investigation of
former Secretary Clinton. According to emails exchanged in late August
2015, there was a significant disagreement between ODAG and FBI
officials regarding whether to acknowledge that a criminal investigation
had been opened. FBI officials, according to the emails, wanted to
acknowledge "opening an investigation into the matter," while ODAG
officials approved language "neither confirming nor denying the
existence of any ongoing investigation," based on longstanding
Department policy. FBI and Department letters sent to Congress on August
27 and September 22, 2015, and a letter sent by the FBI General Counsel
to the State Department on September 22, 2015, used the "neither confirm
nor deny" language.

Contemporaneous emails show that former Director Comey disagreed with
this approach. In an August 27, 2015 email to Deputy Director (DD)
Giuliano, Chief of Staff James Rybicki, and FBI Office of Public Affairs
(OPA) Assistant Director (AD) Mike Kortan, he stated, "I'm thinking it a
bit silly to say we 'can't confirm or deny an investigation' when there
are public statements by former Secretary Clinton and others about
the production of materials to us. I would rather be in a place where we
say we 'don't comment on our investigations.'" Rybicki told the OIG that
Comey thought that the Department and FBI needed to say more about the
investigation because the IC IG referral was made publicly, and refusing
to acknowledge an investigation would "stretch.any credibility the
Department has."

A.  **September 28, 2015 Meeting between Attorney General Lynch and
    Director Comey**

In late September and early October 2015, Comey and Lynch each had
upcoming media and congressional appearances. Anticipating that they
would be asked whether the Department and FBI had opened an
investigation into former Secretary Clinton, Comey asked to meet with
Lynch to coordinate what they would say. Comey told the OIG that it was
the first time the two of them would be asked questions about the
investigation publicly, and he wanted to discuss how they should talk
about it given that there had been news coverage of the referral and "a
lot of public discussion about that the FBI is already looking into
this."

The meeting was held on September 28, 2015, and lasted approximately 15
minutes. Participants in the meeting included Lynch, Axelrod, and Toscas
from the Department, and Comey, Rybicki, and then DD Giuliano from the
FBI.

**1. Comey's Account of the Meeting**

Comey told the OIG that during this meeting AG Lynch agreed they needed
to confirm the existence of the investigation, but she said not to use
the word "investigation," and instead to call it a "matter." Comey said
that Lynch seemed slightly irritated at him when she said this, and that
he took it as a direction. Comey stated:

And I remember saying, "Well, what should I call it?" And she said,
"Call it a matter." And I said, "Why would I do that?" And she said, "I
just want you to do that and so I would very much appreciate it if you
would not refer to it as an investigation." And the reason that gave me
pause is, it was during a period of time which lasted, where I knew from
the open source that the Clinton campaign was keen not to use the word
investigation.. And so that one concerned me and I remember
getting a lump in my stomach and deciding at that moment should I fight
on this or not.

Comey told the OIG that he decided not to fight this instruction from
the AG, but that it "made his spider sense tingle" and caused him to
"worry.that she's carrying water for the Clinton campaign."
As described in Chapter Six, Comey told the OIG and testified before
Congress that this instruction from Lynch was one of the factors that
influenced his unilateral decision to make a public statement on July 5,
2016, without coordinating with the Department.^[^50^](#fn50){#fnref50
.footnote-ref}^ However, Comey also said to us that he had no other
reason to question Lynch's motives at that time, stating, "In fact
my experience with her has always been very good and independent, and
she always struck me as an independent-minded person." Comey stated
that one of the reasons he remembered this meeting so well was that
Toscas made a comment after the meeting about the "Federal Bureau of
Matters," indicating to Comey that Toscas "had the same reaction I did
to it." He said that Toscas did not say explicitly that he shared
Comey's concerns about the meeting, but was "signaling" agreement to him
through "body language and humor."

Rybicki and Giuliano did not specifically recall the discussion that
took place at the meeting, other than that AG Lynch told Comey to refer
to the investigation as a "matter." Giuliano stated, "I don't remember
that specific meeting. I do remember the topic. And I do remember
thinking that (A) it's ridiculous, and (B) quite honestly, I didn't care
what they called it.. It wasn't going to change what we did." He
recalled discussions with the Midyear team after the meeting with Lynch,
telling the OIG that "a lot of people got wrapped around the axle" about
the issue and "thought that that was kind of getting into the politics
of the investigation." He also stated that Comey was "definitely
troubled by it."

However, Rybicki said that he did not recall Comey being troubled by the
meeting or expressing concern that the instruction from Lynch was an
effort to coordinate with the Clinton campaign. Rybicki also said that
he personally did not come away from the meeting with the view that
Lynch was biased. Rybicki did recall Toscas joking about the "Federal
Bureau of Matters."

**2. Lynch's Recollection of the Meeting**

Lynch told the OIG that Comey expressed concern during the meeting about
how to comply with the Department's longstanding policy of neither
confirming nor denying ongoing criminal investigations in the face of
direct questions about the number of agents assigned to the case and the
resources dedicated to it, because answering those questions implicitly
would acknowledge that there was an open investigation. Lynch said that
providing testimony about the allocation of resources or the way that
the Department works a case is a normal practice, but that in her view,
they were not ready to publicly confirm an investigation.

Lynch stated that her discussion with Comey was framed in terms of how
they could testify about the resources dedicated to the investigation
without breaking Department policy. Lynch said that Comey was seeking
guidance on how to handle those issues, particularly given that the
referral was public, and that detailed information about the
investigation had been discussed in the press.

Lynch said that she was aware of numerous letters from Members of

Congress requesting information about the investigation, and that her
meeting with

Comey took place around the same time as a telephone call she had with
Senator

Charles Grassley, who wanted to discuss the Department's handling of
Bryan

Pagliano, a State Department employee who set up one of Clinton's
servers, in order to inform Congress's decision as to whether to grant
him immunity to compel his testimony before
Congress.^[^51^](#fn51){#fnref51 .footnote-ref}^ Lynch told the OIG:

Senator Grassley was asking me literally will I confirm that there is a
criminal investigation of Secretary Clinton, who are the other targets,
who are the subjects, has a grand jury been impaneled, has this young
man Pagliano been given immunity, would I give him a copy of the
immunity order, and all the things that, that Oversight typically asks
for.

So I knew, and I certainly had the view, that we had to be clear and
open with Oversight. You know, whether it's me or the Director. But
consistent with our law enforcement obligations, there are some doors
that we do not open. And I did not think that we were ready to open that
door on the Hill at that time.

Lynch said that her concerns about opening the door to detailed
questions about the investigation informed her view that the Department
should not confirm that there was an investigation. She said that she
recalled stating at the meeting with Comey, "They don't need us to
tell them that there is an investigation. They need us to confirm that
there is an investigation. And there is a difference." She explained:

And once we confirm it publicly, either by saying yes there is an
investigation, or by talking about it in a way that confirms it, the
next series of questions is going to be is it criminal. And it's all
going to be about is the Secretary a subject or a target. And there were
others involved as well. There are other people beyond her who may or
may not be named, but, you know, you start having these discussions.
When will it be over? What are you finding? All those things that in
fact Grassley did ask.

The OIG asked Lynch if she instructed or told Comey, "I want you to call
it a matter." Lynch said that she did not and would not have, because
that was not how she spoke to people. She told the OIG that she
remembered saying the following at the meeting:

Well I, I do remember saying, you know, we typically say we have enough
resources to handle the matter.. I don't know if I used other words
like the case, you know, the inquiry, or something like that. But I do
remember saying that, and I think I may have been saying that because,
again, I was always careful not to talk about an investigation.

I was getting questioned about the referral.and is it going to lead
to an investigation and, you know, we have it, we acknowledge it, we're
going to handle it. And that's all I can say kind of thing.

And so I know that in addition to saying.yes, everyone knows there's
an investigation. They don't need us to tell them that. They need us to
confirm it, and we don't do that. And here's why we don't do that. I
remember making those statements. And I remember saying but of course
you've got to.respond. And one way to respond is just to
say.you've got what you need to handle the matter.

Lynch said that she thought that there had been agreement at the meeting
about what to say. Her takeaway was that they were going to take steps
not to confirm that there was an official investigation open and would
be careful not to do so in how they discussed it. Lynch stated, "It
wasn't a long meeting. It was that, it wasn't contentious. Nobody seemed
upset. So it was more of a discussion." She said that she did not recall
Comey or anyone else expressing disagreement, or

Comey asking, "Why on earth would I do that?"

Lynch said that the decision to avoid confirming an investigation was
not made with any political motive in mind, and that she did not
coordinate messaging with the Clinton campaign. Lynch told the OIG that
she was surprised to learn from Comey's later congressional testimony
that he interpreted the discussion at this meeting as evidence of
potential political bias. She stated:

I was surprised. I was disappointed, somewhat angry. And mostly
surprised that he had never raised it either at the time or later, that
if it was a concern---I was surprised that if he thought that it was a
problem, he was okay also handling things in that way. I just had never
viewed him as someone who was reluctant to raise issues or concerns,
given that I had known him for, for some time .

Lynch recalled Toscas making a joke about the "Federal Bureau of
Matters" to one of the agents who was sitting beside him, and people
laughing. She said that she took this as a joke, as good-natured
"ribbing" or "teasing," and that the laughter told her that others in
attendance also took it as a joke.

Axelrod told us that the discussion about whether to acknowledge an
"investigation" was just one small part of that meeting. He said that
Lynch suggested using the term "matter" as a way of "threading the
needle" to avoid violating Department policy while also not appearing
evasive. According to Axelrod, no one from the FBI raised objections
during the meeting, and the tone of the discussion was collegial. He
said that he thought that Comey and Lynch had reached a "mutual
agreement that using the term 'matter' was the best way to thread the
needle." Axelrod told the OIG that he was surprised to hear Comey's
later congressional testimony that he (Comey) felt uncomfortable with
the discussion, which Axelrod said was not consistent with his
recollection of Comey's reaction in the room, and did not "square
with.his recollection of the facts."

3. Toscas's Notes and Recollection of the Meeting
-------------------------------------------------

Toscas took detailed notes at the September 28 meeting, which he
provided to the OIG. Toscas said that his notes were unusually lengthy
for such a brief meeting because AAG Carlin was out of town and he was
asked to attend in Carlin's place, and he wanted to be able to tell
Carlin what happened.

Referencing his notes, Toscas testified to the OIG at length about what
took place during the meeting. According to Toscas, Comey told Lynch
that he planned to acknowledge at a House Permanent Select Committee on
Intelligence (HPSCI) roundtable that the FBI had received the referral
from the IC IG and that it was being properly staffed and receiving all
necessary resources. Comey stated that he planned to say that the FBI
does not comment on its investigations per longstanding policy, but that
all of its investigations are done professionally and timely. Toscas
said that Comey assured Lynch that he would not say that they had opened
an investigation, but that this would be implicit in what he said, and
there would be news reports afterwards saying that there was an
investigation.

According to Toscas, Lynch replied that she preferred "to discuss it in
terms of a matter.. This is the way I do it and then it avoids
this issue because we should neither confirm nor deny." Toscas said that
he interpreted Lynch's statement as expressing her preference rather
than telling Comey what he should do. Toscas stated he did not recall
Lynch instructing Comey to call it a matter, and he thought he would
have remembered that if it had occurred. He also said that he did not
interpret Lynch's comment as her "trying to shade the investigation
into something it wasn't for some particular reason." However, he
acknowledged that he was not the FBI Director, and that Comey may have
had a different perspective.

Toscas said that after Lynch's comment, Axelrod stated that they needed
to coordinate what to say with a letter sent by the FBI General Counsel
to the State Department the previous week and attached to a public
filing in FOIA litigation, in which the FBI took "great pains to not
call this an investigation, so as not to confirm the existence of an
investigation." According to Toscas, the Department and the FBI had used
the same language in other letters to Congress, and Lynch had a call
scheduled later that day with Senator Charles Grassley in which she
planned to tell him that it would be premature to acknowledge or share
information about any investigation.

Toscas said that Axelrod's statement led to a back and forth between
Comey and Axelrod, during which Comey proposed modifying the letters to
Congress to acknowledge that the FBI had opened an investigation. Toscas
said that he was not sure if Comey was "toying with Axelrod at that
point because I don't think we would ever reissue letters
that.clearly state normal positions." Toscas said that Comey then
asked Axelrod directly, "Why not use the word, you know we're trying to
treat it like any other case and would we do that ordinarily?" In
response, Axelrod again mentioned the need to be consistent with the
letters that were sent the previous week.

Toscas told the OIG that he mentioned at the meeting that the Department
opens only a small fraction of the referrals it receives from the
intelligence community as criminal investigations, and that the
Department may not want to publicly acknowledge an investigation into
former Secretary Clinton because it could serve as precedent for other
referrals. Toscas said he also made clear to the group that Midyear was
a criminal investigation, and that the prosecutors had referred to it as
an investigation in letters to counsel and in search warrant
applications.

Toscas said that Comey concluded the meeting by agreeing to call it a
matter, stating, "OK, I think that will work." This statement also
appeared in Toscas's contemporaneous notes. Toscas told the OIG that
there was no indication at the time that Comey was concerned about the
meeting or that the meeting had led him to question Lynch's
impartiality.

Asked whether he made a comment to Comey about the "Federal Bureau of
Matters," Toscas said that he did not specifically recall doing so but
may have. He said that, if he did, he intended it as a joke rather than
as a criticism of Lynch. He told the OIG:

I don't know if I ribbed Comey walking out. You know he's a friend
of mine.. In any event, maybe I said that, maybe I didn't. It
wouldn't faze me if I did, because it was in line with what I was saying
to them about "investigation" being part of the FBI's name. But it
makes it appear as though I was sort of knocking the AG Lynch in the
way they reported it, which is obviously why some goofball felt that
they should talk about that to the
newspapers..^[^52^](#fn52){#fnref52 .footnote-ref}^

**C. October 1, 2015 Comey Meeting with Media**

In a "pen and pad" with reporters on October 1, 2015, Comey used the
term

"matter" in response to questions about whether the FBI had opened an
investigation. According to a transcript of the appearance, Comey told
reporters that he recently had a closed session with HPSCI and would say
publicly what he told the committee: that the FBI had received a
referral involving former Secretary Clinton's use of a private email
account and the possible exposure of classified information through that
account, but that he was limited in what he could say because the FBI
does not talk about its ongoing work. Comey stated, "I am following this
very closely and I get briefed on it regularly.. I am confident that
we have the resources and the personnel assigned to the matter, as we do
all our work, so we're able to do it as we do all our work in a
professional, prompt and independent way." Asked about the timeline for
completing any investigation, Comey stated, "Again, I'm not going to
talk about this particular matter.. Part of doing our work well is we
don't talk about it while we do it."

Following Comey's appearance, various news articles reported that Comey
had acknowledged the existence of an investigation into former Secretary
Clinton's use of a private email server.^[^53^](#fn53){#fnref53
.footnote-ref}^ Comey received an email containing news clips
summarizing several of these articles and forwarded it to Rybicki,
stating, "Will leave it to you to tell DOJ that I never used the word
investigation." Rybicki replied, "Already covered. I read back your
statement to them and told them this is exactly the type of confusion we
were concerned about as we were crafting."

**II. Reaction to White House Statements about the Midyear
Investigation**

On Sunday, October 11, 2015, an interview of then President Barack Obama
was aired on the CBS show 60 Minutes. During this interview, Obama
characterized former Secretary Clinton's use of a private email server
as a "mistake," but stated that it did not "pose a national security
problem" and was "not a situation in which America's national security
was endangered." Obama also stated that the issue had been "ginned up"
because of the presidential race. Two days later, on October 13, 2015,
Obama's Press Secretary, Josh Earnest, was asked whether Obama's
comments "should be read as an attempt to steer the direction of the FBI
investigation." Earnest replied that Obama made his comments based on
public information, and they were not intended to influence an
independent investigation.

Former President Obama's comments caused concern among FBI officials
about the potential impact on the investigation. Former EAD John
Giacalone told the OIG, "We open up criminal investigations. And you
have the President of the United States saying this is just a
mistake.. That's a problem, right?" Former AD Randy Coleman expressed
the same concern, stating, "The FBI had a group of guys in here,
professionals, that are conducting an investigation. And

the.President of the United States just came out and said there's no
there there." Coleman said that he would have expected someone in FBI or
Department leadership to contact one of Obama's national security
officials, and "tell him or her, hey knock it off." Michael
Steinbach, the former EAD for the National Security Branch, told the OIG
that the comments generated "controversy" within the FBI. Steinbach
stated, "You're prejudging the results of an investigation before
they really even have been started.. That's.hugely problematic for
us."

Department prosecutors also were concerned. Responding to an email from
Laufman about Obama's 60 Minutes interview, Toscas stated, "Saw this.
And as one of the prosecutors and I discussed last week, of course
it had no---and will never have any---effect whatsoever on our work and
our independent judgment." Prosecutor 4 told the OIG that Obama's
statement was the genesis of the FBI's suspicions that the Department's
leadership was politically biased. This prosecutor stated, "I know that
the FBI considered those statements inappropriate. And that
it.generated a suspicion that there was a political bias.going
on from the Executive Branch."

Asked about former President Obama's statements, Lynch stated, "I never
spoke to the President directly about it, because I never spoke to him
about any case or investigation. He didn't speak to me about it either."
She told the OIG that she did not think the President should have made
the comment on 60 Minutes. She stated, "I don't know where it came from.
And I don't know, I don't know why he would have thought that either, to
be honest with you. Because, to me, anyone looking at this case would
have seen a national security component to it. So I don't, I truly do
not know where he got that from."

Former President Obama's Press Secretary, Josh Earnest, made additional
comments about the Midyear investigation during a press conference in
early 2016. On January 29, 2016, in response to a question about whether
the White House thought that former Secretary Clinton would be indicted,
Earnest stated:

That will be a decision that is made by the Department of Justice and
prosecutors over there. What I know that some officials over there have
said is that she is not a target of the investigation. So that does not
seem to be the direction that it's trending, but I'm certainly not going
to weigh in on a decision or in that process in any way. That is a
decision to be made solely by independent prosecutors. But, again, based
on what we know from the Department of Justice, it does not seem to be
headed in that direction.

After this press conference, Melanie Newman, the Director of the
Department's Office of Public Affairs (OPA), received a transcript of
Earnest's statements about the investigation and forwarded it to Axelrod
and three other Department officials. Newman stated in the email to
these officials, "I've spoken to the White House and asked that they
clarify this, to make clear they have no insight into this
investigation. And if they don't correct it, I will. I'm waiting to hear
back." This email also was forwarded to Lynch.

Asked about this email, Newman said that she spoke to Earnest that day.
Newman said that Earnest told her that he had based his comments on what
he had read in news stories, not conversations with anyone in the
Department. She said that no one in the White House ever reached out to
her about the Midyear investigation, nor was she aware of White House
staff reaching out to anyone else in the Department, noting, "They were
very, very, very careful about engaging with us on that topic." Axelrod
similarly told the OIG that Earnest's comments implied that the White
House had received a briefing on the Midyear investigation, which he
said "never happened."

Lynch's Chief of Staff stated that Department officials were "very
upset" about Earnest's statement, because "as far as we knew, no one at
Department of Justice had spoken to anyone in the White House about it."
The Chief of Staff told the OIG that they were particularly concerned by
Earnest's statement that former Secretary Clinton was not a target. The
Chief of Staff said that she spoke to officials in the White House
Counsel's Office to tell them that the Department did not know where
Earnest was getting his information, and to ask them to talk to Earnest.
The Chief of Staff did not specifically recall Lynch's reaction to this
statement, but said that she was "probably very upset..
Anytime there was ever any suggestion that the White House, or that
DOJ had improperly done something in an investigation, or discussed
something of.a political nature, she would not be happy about it."

Prosecutors again were concerned by these comments. On January 29, 2016,
Toscas sent the following email to Laufman, seeking to assure the team
that the investigation would not be influenced by White House
statements:

As discussed, I spoke with ODAG and they are not aware of anybody from
DOJ sharing any such information or assessment with the White House, as
the below statements appear to suggest. I want to reiterate what I've
told you and the team throughout our work on this investigation---the
explicit direction we received from the AG and DAG on multiple occasions
is that they have total confidence in the team of prosecutors who are
working on this case and they have instructed us to proceed with this
matter as we would any other, without interference of any kind, and with
the independence we have in all of our cases. They have never wavered
from that and have never said or done anything to send or suggest a
contrary message. With respect to the below statements that erroneously
imply that the Department has shared information about, or an assessment
of, this matter with the White House, we should not and will not allow
such irresponsible statements to have any effect at all on our work. We
will continue to thoroughly and professionally investigate this matter
as we would any other---and, as always---and as you, John Carlin,
and I have said repeatedly---we will follow the facts wherever they
lead. Thanks.

Toscas emailed Laufman a second time, stating, "Please feel free to
share this with the whole team (if you haven't already)." During his
interview with the OIG, Toscas described Earnest's statements as "goofy"
and "ridiculous," expressing frustration that he had to address comments
by the White House when preparing Lynch to testify before Congress
because of the perception of political bias that they created.

Asked about Earnest's statements, prosecutors told the OIG that the only
interactions they had with the White House concerning the investigation
were with the White House Counsel's Office to obtain a classification
review of documents in a Special Access Program (SAP) controlled by the
White House and to interview a National Security Council staffer.
Prosecutor 1 told the OIG that he was not aware of contacts between
Department leadership and the White House Counsel's Office or White
House staff. Notes taken by Laufman indicate that on January 30, 2016,
one of the prosecutors reached out to their point of contact in the
White House Counsel's Office and asked about Earnest's comments.
According to these notes, this prosecutor was told that the content of
the discussions between the White House Counsel's Office and the Midyear
team about the classification review and the interview of the staffer
was limited to a small group of people in the White House Counsel's
Office, and that nothing that the prosecutors had discussed with the
White House Counsel's Office would be known to Earnest.

Lynch testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee on March 9, 2016.
Asked about the investigation, Lynch stated that she had never discussed
the investigation with former President Obama or anyone in the White
House. Lynch stated, "It's my hope that when it comes to ongoing
investigations that we all would stay silent. And I can assure you that
neither I nor anyone from the Department has briefed to Mr. Earnest or
anyone at the White House about this matter or other law enforcement
matters.. I'm simply not aware of the source of his
information."^[^54^](#fn54){#fnref54 .footnote-ref}^

Lynch told the OIG that she recalled that Newman spoke with the White
House Communications Office after Earnest's comments and was clear that
they were inappropriate and needed to be corrected. Asked whether she
perceived these comments as an effort to direct where the investigation
was going or felt influenced by them, she said that she did not. Lynch
said that she also had a discussion with the White House Counsel after
she testified, and that during this discussion he acknowledged that the
comments should not have happened.

However, former President Obama again made public comments about the
Midyear investigation in an interview with FOX News Sunday on April 10,
2016. Obama stated that while former Secretary Clinton had been
"careless" in managing her emails while she was Secretary of State, she
would never intentionally do anything to endanger the security of the
United States with her emails. He also stated that he would not
interfere in the FBI's investigation into her private email server.
Obama stated, "I guarantee that there is no political influence in any
investigation conducted by the Justice Department, or the F.B.I.---not
just in this case, but in any case."^[^55^](#fn55){#fnref55
.footnote-ref}^

**PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY**

BLANK
=====

**CHAPTER FIVE: INVESTIGATIVE METHODS USED IN THE INVESTIGATION**

The Midyear team used several types of investigative methods and made
various strategic decisions during the course of its investigation. Some
of these decisions have been the subject of criticism and allegations
that they were based on improper considerations.

In this chapter, we describe the following investigative methods and
decisions made by the Midyear team: efforts to identify relevant sources
of physical evidence; efforts to understand and access Clinton's
servers; use of criminal process, including subpoenas, 2703(d) orders,
and search warrants to obtain physical evidence; use of consent to
obtain physical evidence; efforts to obtain evidence related to
Clinton's senior aides; use of voluntary interviews; decisions to grant
certain witnesses use immunity; strategies employed to secure voluntary
interviews and voluntary production of evidence from Cheryl Mills and
Heather Samuelson; and investigative decisions surrounding the voluntary
interview of Hillary Clinton. We describe the reasons given for these
decisions, disagreements among members of the Midyear team about them,
especially between the FBI and the prosecutors, and the impact of these
decisions on the investigation's access to relevant information and the
completeness of the investigation. We also describe an internal file
review of the Midyear investigation conducted by the FBI's Inspection
Division (INSD) in September and October 2017 following our discovery of
concerning text messages between Strzok and Page.

In addition, we discuss instant messages in which Agent 1 expressed
concerns about the quality of the Midyear investigation. We considered
these messages as part of our analysis of whether the Midyear team
conducted a thorough and impartial investigation.

In the analysis section of this chapter, we assess whether the evidence
supports a conclusion that any of the investigative decisions we
reviewed were based on improper considerations, consistent with the
analytical construct described in Chapter One.

**I. FBI's Efforts to Identify and Review Relevant Sources of Evidence**

The Midyear team began its investigation by reviewing the 30,490 emails
that Clinton had produced to the State Department. They reviewed them to
identify emails that appeared to contain classified information and
evidence of intent to mishandle classified
information.^[^56^](#fn56){#fnref56 .footnote-ref}^ Witnesses told us
that to search for evidence of intent, the analysts looked for, among
other things, classification markings on the documents, statements
indicating that email participants knew information was classified, and
statements indicating that Clinton decided to use a private server for
an improper purpose, such as to avoid FOIA or other laws. One analyst
told us that there were at least six analysts consistently involved with
reviewing these emails, and, at times, there were as many as fifteen or
sixteen analysts doing so. Once the team identified emails that appeared
to contain classified information, they sent them to other agencies
within the U.S. Intelligence Community ("USIC agencies") with equities
in them for formal classification review.

FBI agents and Department prosecutors told us that, thereafter, a large
focus of the investigation was locating the remaining 31,830 emails that
made up the entire 62,320 emails that Clinton's attorneys had reportedly
reviewed before producing her work-related emails to the State
Department. Clinton's attorneys did not produce those 31,830 emails to
the State Department because, they stated, they were personal in nature;
instead, the attorneys instructed Paul Combetta of Platte River Networks
("PRN")---the company that managed Clinton's server--- to remove the
emails from their own laptops and modify the server's email retention
period so that emails older than 60 days would not be retained. In March
2015, Combetta removed the emails from Clinton's server using BleachBit
after realizing he had failed to implement the new email retention
period several months earlier. The FBI team wanted to review these
emails, if possible, to determine whether any were work-related or
contained classified information, and to search for evidence of
Clinton's intent in using a private server.

FBI agents and analysts, including the Supervisory Special Agent (SSA)
assigned to the Midyear investigation, told us that to find the missing
31,830 emails, the team attempted to identify and obtain access to any
server or device--- "whether it was a BlackBerry, iPad, PC or
phone"---Clinton used during her tenure, as well as devices used to back
up her emails. The FBI also sought email content or header information
from the official U.S. government and private email accounts of certain
individuals who were known to communicate directly with Clinton by email
or who were involved in email chains that ultimately resulted in
classified information being forwarded to Clinton. However, as discussed
in Section V.C of this chapter, the FBI did not seek to obtain the
personal devices of State Department employees, besides Clinton, who
sometimes used private email for State Department work and who used
those devices to communicate with Clinton while she was Secretary of
State.

Based on our review, the FBI sent preservation requests to the State
Department for nearly one-thousand official State Department email
accounts. One analyst told us that the State Department was unable to
supply many of the email records the FBI requested due to, among other
things, limitations in the State Department's recordkeeping systems.
However, the FBI obtained records from the official State Department
email accounts of certain employees, including the three senior aides
with whom Clinton had the most email contact. The FBI also made requests
of other government agencies, including the CIA, the Defense
Intelligence Agency (DIA), the Department of Defense (DOD), and the
Executive Office of the President (EOP), to search their official email
systems for emails to or from email accounts on the clintonemail.com
domain. In addition, as discussed in Sections III and V below, the
Midyear team used compulsory process to obtain email records from
certain private email accounts.

The FBI also requested the State-Department-issued computers and
handheld devices used by certain employees during their State Department
tenure.

However, with the exception of a desktop computer used by Bryan Pagliano
(a

State Department employee who set up Clinton's second server), the State
Department told the FBI that it either did not preserve or could not
locate those devices.

FBI witnesses told us that both FBI agents and analysts were involved in
determining what devices and other evidence to obtain. Based on our
review of the evidence, the FBI obtained more than 30 devices; received
consent to search Clinton-related communications on most of these
devices; and identified numerous work-related emails that were not part
of the 30,490 emails produced by Clinton's attorneys to the State
Department, many of which they sent to other agencies for classification
review. The thirty devices included two of Clinton's servers, each of
which consisted of multiple devices; storage devices used alongside
Clinton's servers; numerous devices that were used to back up Clinton's
emails during her tenure; some of Clinton's handheld devices; Pagliano's
State Department desktop computer; several flash drives and laptop
computers that contained copies of the 30,490 emails that Clinton's
attorneys produced to the State Department; and the two laptops used by
Clinton's attorneys to cull her emails for production to the State
Department. Once the FBI received consent to review a device, staff from
the FBI's Operational Technology Division (OTD) generally imaged the
device and prepared the image for a filter team to remove material that
was privileged or otherwise not subject to search pursuant to the terms
of a consent agreement. OTD then uploaded the emails and other data from
the device for FBI analysts to review. OTD also attempted to
de-duplicate emails. The analysts reviewed the emails recovered from
each device for the same purposes as they reviewed the initial
30,490---to identify both suspected classified information and evidence
of intent to mishandle classified information.

The Midyear team also sought and obtained a wide range of other
information relevant to the investigation, such as Clinton's cable,
telephone, and Internet subscriber and service information; financial
information for certain witnesses; business records pertaining to the
services provided by the companies that supported Clinton's servers;
records related to security services protecting Clinton's servers; and
information from mail carriers related to the delivery of a laptop that
at one time stored Clinton's archived emails. Prosecutor 1 told us that
the team sought records from at least three different companies in an
effort to find the Blackberry emails from the beginning of Clinton's
tenure as Secretary of

State.^63^ Analysts told us that they reviewed these materials to search
for, among

^63^ Based on the LHM, the 30,490 emails provided by Clinton's attorneys
to the State

Department contained no emails sent or received by Clinton during the
first two months of her tenure,

January 21, 2009, through March 18, 2009, and the FBI investigative team
was unable to locate the

BlackBerry device she used during that time. Witnesses, including former
Director Comey, told us

other things, evidence of mishandling classified information and
additional leads for information. For example, one analyst stated that
through records obtained from various phone companies, he was able to
identify the 13 devices that were associated with two telephone numbers
that Clinton used.

According to the LHM, the FBI found and reviewed "approximately 17,448
unique work-related and personal emails from Clinton's tenure"
containing her email address that were not part of the original 30,490
that Clinton's lawyers had produced to the State Department. Comey
stated in his July 5, 2016, press conference that the FBI found "several
thousand" work-related emails that were not part of the 30,490 emails.
However, one analyst told us, and documentation we reviewed showed, that
the FBI did not conduct its review in such a way that it could calculate
the precise amount of work-related emails discovered by the FBI that had
not been produced to the State Department. Instead, as described below,
they focused on identifying the number of classified emails that both
were and were not included in the 30,490.

None of the emails, including those that were found to contain
classified information, included a header or footer with classification
markings. As we discuss further in Chapter Seven, this absence of clear
classification markings played a significant role in the decision by the
Midyear prosecutors to recommend to Attorney General Lynch in July 2016
that the investigation should be closed without prosecution. According
to the LHM, the FBI, with the assistance of other USIC agencies,
identified "81 email chains containing approximately 193 individual
emails that were classified from the CONFIDENTIAL to TOP SECRET levels
at the time the emails were drafted on UNCLASSIFIED systems and sent to
or from Clinton's personal server." In other words, the USIC agencies
determined that these 81 email chains, although not marked classified,
contained information classified at the time the emails were sent and
should have been so marked. Twelve of the 81 classified email chains
were not among the 30,490 that Clinton's lawyers had produced to the
State Department, and these were all classified at the Secret or
Confidential levels. Seven of the 81 email chains contained information
associated with a Special Access Program ("SAP"), which witnesses told
us is considered particularly sensitive. The emails containing Top
Secret and SAP information were included in the 30,490 provided to the
State Department.

In June 2016, near the end of the investigation, investigators found
three email chains, consisting of eight individual emails, that
"contained at least one paragraph marked '(C),' a marking ostensibly
indicating the presence of information classified at the CONFIDENTIAL
level." According to a June 13, 2016 text message exchange between
Strzok and Page, the emails containing the "(C)" portion markings were
part of the 30,490 that Clinton's attorneys had provided to the State
Department in 2014 but the FBI did not notice them until June 2016 after
the IC IG discovered them. By that point in time, as discussed in
Chapter Six below, Comey had been drafting his statement announcing the
closing of the investigation. Strzok

that they believed these missing emails could contain important evidence
regarding Clinton's intent in setting up a private email server.

wrote to Page that "DoJ was Very Concerned about this.. Because
they're worried, holy cow, if the fbi missed this, what else was
missed?" Strzok further wrote, "No one noticed. And while minor, it cuts
against 'I never send or received anything marked
classified.'"^[^57^](#fn57){#fnref57 .footnote-ref}^ According to the
prosecutors, Mills, Abedin, and Jake Sullivan were each parties to at
least one email in the chains with the (C) markings. However, none of
them were ever asked about the emails, because the FBI had not
discovered the markings before their interviews and did not seek to
reinterview them.^[^58^](#fn58){#fnref58 .footnote-ref}^

Witnesses told us that although the FBI found work-related emails,
including classified emails, that were not part of the 30,490 produced
to the State Department by Clinton's lawyers, they were not able to
determine whether these emails were part of the original 62,320 reviewed
by Clinton's attorneys. This is because some of the emails they found
through other sources could have been deleted from Clinton's account or
"overwritten in the ordinary course" before Clinton's attorneys reviewed
her emails for production to the State Department. Thus, they also were
unable to determine how many of the 31,830 deleted emails were never
recovered.

The FBI also conducted "intrusion analyses" on each of the devices and
other evidence to determine whether any classified information had been
compromised. An FBI agent assigned to the Midyear team to conduct
intrusion and other forensic analysis ("Forensics Agent") described the
team's efforts in this regard as exhaustive. He stated that these
efforts included (1) examining the servers and others devices to
identify suspicious logins or other activity, and (2) searching numerous
datasets to determine whether foreign adversaries or known hostile
domestic actors had accessed emails that the Midyear team had confirmed
to contain classified information.

Comey stated the following in his July 5, 2016, press conference
regarding possible cyber intrusion of Clinton's email servers:

With respect to potential computer intrusion by hostile actors, we did
not find direct evidence that Secretary Clinton\'s personal email
domain, in its various configurations since 2009, was successfully
hacked. But, given the nature of the system and of the actors
potentially involved, we assess that we would be unlikely to see such
direct evidence. We do assess that hostile actors gained access to the
private commercial email accounts of people with whom Secretary Clinton
was in regular contact from her personal account. We also assess that
Secretary Clinton\'s use of a personal email domain was both known by a
large number of people and readily apparent. She also used her personal
email extensively while outside the United States, including sending and
receiving work-related emails in the territory of sophisticated
adversaries. Given that combination of factors, we assess it is possible
that hostile actors gained access to Secretary Clinton\'s personal email
account.

The LHM stated, "FBI investigation and forensic analysis did not find
evidence confirming that Clinton's email server systems were compromised
by cyber means." However, the LHM also stated that the FBI identified
one successful compromise of an account belonging to one of former
President Clinton's staffers on a different domain within the same
server former Secretary Clinton used during her tenure. The FBI was
unable to identify the individual responsible for the compromise, but
confirmed that the individual had logged in to the former staffer's
account and "browsed email folders and attachments." According to
evidence we reviewed, the FBI also confirmed compromises to email
accounts belonging to certain individuals who communicated with Clinton
by email, such as Jake Sullivan and Sidney

Blumenthal.^[^59^](#fn59){#fnref59 .footnote-ref}^

The LHM stated that the FBI was limited in its intrusion analysis due to
the "FBI's inability to recover all server equipment and the lack of
complete server data for the relevant time period." According to the
LHM, the FBI also identified vulnerabilities in Clinton's server systems
and found that there had been numerous unsuccessful attempts by
potential malicious actors to exploit those vulnerabilities.
Nonetheless, the FBI Forensics Agent told the OIG that, although he did
not believe there was "any way of determining.100%" whether Clinton's
servers had been compromised, he felt "fairly confident that there
wasn't an intrusion." When asked whether a sophisticated foreign
adversary was likely to be able to cover its tracks, he stated, "They
could. Yeah. But I, I felt as if we coordinated with the right units at
headquarters.for those specific adversaries.. And the information
that was returned back to me was that there was no indication of a
compromise."

**II. The Midyear Team's Efforts to Understand and Access Clinton's
Servers**

Prosecutor 1 told us that it took the Midyear team time to understand
the setup and sequence of the various servers Clinton used. This
prosecutor stated that an understanding of the server setup was a
necessary foundation for the Midyear team's investigation. According to
the LHM, the FBI discovered three servers that for different periods
stored work-related emails sent or received by Clinton during her tenure
as Secretary of State. Collectively, we refer to these three servers as
the "Clinton servers."

The first server was set up in 2008 by Justin Cooper, a former aide to
former

President Clinton, and is referred to in the LHM as the "Apple Server."
Based on evidence we reviewed, the Apple Server was primarily set up for
former President Clinton's staff, but Secretary Clinton also used it for
her work purposes from January 2009 until approximately March 18, 2009,
about two months into her tenure. During this time, Clinton primarily
used a personally acquired BlackBerry device that was connected to the
Apple Server.

The LHM indicates that the second server, referred to in the LHM as the

Pagliano Server, was used from March 2009 through June 2013. Cooper told
the FBI that "in or around January 2009 the decision was made to move to
another server because the Apple Server was antiquated and users were
experiencing problems with email delivery on their Blackberry devices."
Cooper contacted Bryan Pagliano, an information technology specialist
who worked on Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign, to help him set
up the Pagliano server. Numerous individuals had email accounts on the
Pagliano Server, including former President Clinton, former President
Clinton's staff, Huma Abedin---who was Clinton's Deputy Chief of Staff
at the State Department---and Clinton herself. Clinton and Abedin were
the only State Department employees with accounts on the
\@clintonemail.com domain on the Pagliano Server.

The third server, which is referred to in the LHM as the "PRN server,"
was active after Clinton's tenure as Secretary of State ended, from
approximately June 2013 through October 2015. The LHM stated that in
early 2013, staff for Clinton and former President Clinton discussed
transitioning to a new vendor for email services, "due to user
limitations and reliability concerns regarding the Pagliano Server." The
staff chose the "Denver-based information technology firm Platte River
Networks (PRN)" for this purpose. According to the LHM, PRN employee
Paul Combetta migrated the email accounts from the Pagliano Server to
the PRN server.

Following the migration, the Pagliano Server was stored in a data center
in New Jersey, although it no longer hosted email services and Microsoft
Exchange was uninstalled from it on December 3, 2013.

According to the LHM, the FBI learned through witness interviews that
the Apple Server, in use from 2007 to March 2009, was ultimately
discarded and, thus, the FBI was never able to access it for review.
However, based on evidence we reviewed, the Midyear team obtained access
to certain back-up data from the Apple Server held on Cooper's personal
laptops through consent agreements with Cooper's attorney. The Midyear
team obtained both the Pagliano and PRN servers through consent
agreements with David Kendall and Clinton's other attorneys at Williams
and Connolly.

The FBI's ability to review emails on both the Pagliano and PRN servers
was limited. With respect to the Pagliano Server, most of the emails
that remained on the Pagliano server following the transition to the PRN
server were in the "unallocated space" due to the removal of Microsoft
Exchange in December 2013. FBI analysts told us that emails in the
unallocated space were often fragmented and difficult to reconstruct.
With respect to the PRN server, the FBI discovered through forensic
analysis and witness interviews that Combetta had transferred most of
Clinton's archived emails from her tenure as Secretary of State to the
PRN server, but subsequently deleted and "wiped" them from the server
using "BleachBit." Based on the LHM, FD-302s, and PRN documents
collected by the FBI, the transfer of emails to the PRN server and
subsequent wiping of the PRN server occurred as described in the
paragraphs below.

At around the time of the transition to the PRN server in the spring of
2013, Clinton's former aide, Monica Hanley, created two archives of
Clinton's emails from the Pagliano Server, one on a thumb drive (Archive
Thumb Drive) and one on a laptop computer (Archive
Laptop).^[^60^](#fn60){#fnref60 .footnote-ref}^ In early 2014, Hanley
mailed the Archive Laptop to Combetta to transfer Clinton's archived
emails to the PRN server. She further directed him to "wipe" the Archive
Laptop and mail it to Clinton's office assistant at the Clinton
Foundation after he completed the transfer. Combetta used a "dummy"
email account to transfer Clinton's archived emails into a mailbox
entitled "HRC archive" on the PRN server.^[^61^](#fn61){#fnref61
.footnote-ref}^ Combetta told the FBI that he then, per Hanley's
instructions, deleted the emails from the Archive Laptop and mailed the
Archive Laptop to Clinton's office assistant, but did not "wipe" the
laptop. Email records obtained by the FBI showed that Clinton's office
assistant sent emails to Combetta in both March and April 2014 asking
when she should expect to receive the "wiped laptop;" however, Clinton's
office assistant told the FBI that she did not recall ever receiving it.

An analyst told us and FBI records show that the team sought and
obtained records from multiple mail carriers in an effort to locate the
Archive Laptop. Based on these records, the FBI was able to confirm that
the laptop was delivered to Paul Combetta on February 24, 2014; however,
the FBI found no records showing that

Combetta mailed the Archive Laptop to Clinton's office assistant as
requested. The FBI also attempted to obtain the Archive Thumb Drive from
Hanley, but she stated she could not recall what happened to it.

According to the LHM, FD-302s from Combetta's, Mills's, and Samuelson's
interviews, and PRN documents collected by the FBI, in the summer of
2014, Combetta uploaded .pst files of Clinton's archived emails to
Mills's and Samuelson's laptops to enable them to review Clinton's
emails and produce her work-related emails to the State Department. In
late 2014 or early 2015, after Clinton produced her work-related emails
to the State Department, Mills and Samuelson requested that Combetta
remove Clinton's emails from their laptops, and he did so using
BleachBit. At around the same time, Mills directed Combetta to change
the email retention policy on Clinton's clintonemail.com account to 60
days, because Clinton had decided that she no longer needed access to
her personal emails that were older than 60 days. Combetta told the FBI
that he mistakenly neglected to make the change at the time and realized
his mistake in March 2015. He stated that, despite the intervening
issuance of a congressional preservation order on March 3, 2015, he "had
an 'oh shit' moment" and wiped the HRC archive mailbox from the PRN
server using BleachBit sometime between March 25 and March 31, 2015.

Despite the use of BleachBit, the FBI was able to recover some of
Clinton's archived emails from both the PRN server and the laptops used
by Mills and Samuelson to cull Clinton's emails. The FBI also recovered
some of Clinton's archived emails from a search of the dummy email
account that Combetta used to transfer Clinton's emails from the Archive
Laptop to the PRN server and, as discussed in Section I of this chapter,
from various other sources.

**III. Use of Criminal Process to Obtain Documentary and Digital
Evidence**

Despite the public perception that the Midyear investigation did not use
a grand jury, and instead relied exclusively on consent, we found that
agents and prosecutors did use grand jury subpoenas and other compulsory
process to gain access to documentary and digital evidence. According to
documents we reviewed, at least 56 grand jury subpoenas were issued,
five court orders were obtained pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 2703(d) (2703(d)
orders), and three search warrants were granted. The Midyear team also
sent numerous preservation letters to various entities, including
Internet Service Providers, former Secretary Clinton's attorneys, and
U.S. government agencies. We were told that FBI agents generally worked
directly with the EDVA prosecutors to obtain subpoenas and 2703(d)
orders, without seeking approval from the CES prosecutors, Laufman,
Toscas, or any higher level Department officials. Toscas told us that he
was the highest level Department official that approved search warrant
affidavits, and that he provided general information about search
warrants that were being sought in briefings to Carlin, Yates, and
Lynch.

The FBI served 2703(d) orders on commercial email service providers,
such as Google (Gmail) and Yahoo!, for information maintained on their
servers associated with the private email accounts used by Huma Abedin,
Paul Combetta, Cheryl Mills, and two other
individuals.^[^62^](#fn62){#fnref62 .footnote-ref}^ The FBI sought
2703(d) orders for these individuals after discovering from other
sources that emails containing classified information were sent from or
received by their accounts. FBI witnesses told us that the purposes of
obtaining the 2703(d) orders were to determine whether the known
classified emails continued to reside in the unauthorized email accounts
and whether they were forwarded to other unauthorized locations, thus
posing risks to national security. If they confirmed that the known
classified emails continued to reside in the email accounts, they would
then consider seeking search warrants for email content within the same
accounts.

Based on the 2703(d) results, the FBI was able to confirm that
classified information continued to reside in just one of these five
accounts---the account belonging to Combetta. Thus, on June 20, 2016,
the FBI sought a search warrant for this account. According to the
search warrant, the FBI initially sought the 2703(d) order for
Combetta's account after observing numerous emails containing metadata
for Combetta's dummy email account in the original 30,490 emails
provided to the State Department and determining that many of these
emails contained classified information. Combetta told the FBI that he
created the dummy email account to transfer Clinton's archived emails
from the Archive Laptop to the PRN Server. Based on the results of the
2703(d) order, the FBI determined that 820 of Clinton's emails, dated
between October 25, 2010, and December 31, 2010, remained in the dummy
email account. The Midyear team obtained a search warrant to view the
content of these emails and search for other emails relevant to the
investigation.

Prosecutor 2 told us that the Midyear team sought compulsory process
when evidence could not be obtained through consent or when "the terms
of the consent were such that additional process needed to be sought."
For example, on August 28, 2015, the Midyear team obtained a search
warrant for the Pagliano Server even though Clinton's attorneys had
voluntarily produced and provided consent for the FBI to search it.
According to the search warrant application, upon conducting a
preliminary examination of the Pagliano server, the FBI discovered that
it contained three domains---two besides the clintonemail.com
domain---and email accounts of numerous individuals unrelated to the
FBI's investigation, such as former President Clinton's staff. The FBI
further discovered that Microsoft Exchange had been uninstalled from the
Pagliano Server in December 2013. As a result, the three different
domains were commingled in the server's unallocated space and the FBI
could not segregate the accounts without "a complete forensic analysis
of the

Pagliano Server." Because Clinton's attorneys were only able to provide
consent to

Lead Analyst's notes from early June 2016, the FBI received the returns
from this 2703(d) order and, as of that time, the email containing
classified information no longer resided in his account.

The Midyear team did not seek 2703(d) orders for information related to
Clinton's private email accounts. Instead, as described later in this
section and in Section IV of this chapter, the team reviewed the
contents of Clinton's emails on the Pagliano and PRN servers through a
combination of consent agreements and a search warrant. The team also
sought records from three different companies in an effort to track down
emails Clinton sent or received on her Blackberry account in early 2009,
before she began using the clintonemail.com domain. However, witnesses
told us that these companies no longer maintained Clinton's emails on
their servers.

search Clinton's email accounts on the server, the FBI obtained a search
warrant to examine the unallocated space.

**IV. Use of Consent to Obtain Physical Evidence**

**A. Debate over the Use of Consent**

Based on the evidence we reviewed, although the Midyear team used
compulsory process on multiple occasions as described above, the
prosecutors sought to obtain digital and documentary evidence by consent
whenever possible. Witnesses told us that this caused frustration within
the FBI, which preferred obtaining evidence with search warrants or
subpoenas. The witnesses generally agreed that this debate is common
among prosecutors and agents and was not unique to Midyear. To the
extent the disagreement about the use of criminal process was more
pronounced in Midyear, witnesses stated that they believed this was due
to Midyear being a high-profile investigation. The Lead Analyst
explained that "everyone was under intense pressure," which enhanced
the "magnitude" of this disagreement.

Numerous Department and FBI witnesses told us that the debate over how
to obtain evidence was mostly about efficiency---the prosecutors
believed they could obtain evidence faster through consent and the FBI
believed that criminal process was more efficient. The prosecutors
stated that, in their view, consent is more efficient than process when
witnesses are cooperative and, as Prosecutor 4 noted, when there is no
concern that evidence will be destroyed to obstruct an investigation.
Based on the evidence we reviewed, Clinton's attorneys contacted
Department prosecutors numerous times to express Clinton's willingness
to cooperate by being interviewed and providing evidence voluntarily.
Prosecutor 4 told us it was his view that the risk of destruction of
evidence, in response to a voluntary production request, is less likely
in cases where parties are represented by experienced attorneys, such as
"firms like Williams and Connolly" (which represented Clinton), because
the attorneys are aware of the risks associated with destroying
evidence. Prosecutor 4 stated, "I'm not saying that they're more
ethical. I'm just saying they're smarter." The prosecutors stated that
seeking evidence through consent also saved time by allowing the
government to avoid motions to quash subpoenas based on privilege or
lack of probable cause.

A few FBI witnesses told us that they believed the prosecutors in CES
were generally more "risk averse" in their handling of cases than
prosecutors in other parts of the Department. Prosecutor 1 explained
that there are reasons to be especially cautious in the types of cases
CES handles, including protecting the sensitive and classified
information involved in those cases. This prosecutor told us that CES
prosecutors must consider questions such as whether the intelligence
community will permit the use of classified information in their cases,
whether moving a "case forward" is worth the risk that the "use of
information gathered by a human source could.identify sources and
methods," and whether "the criminal prosecution of someone is more
valuable than the continued collection." Laufman and Prosecutor 4
told us that the use of criminal process tends to increase the risk of
leaks and public disclosures. Prosecutor 4 told us that leaks undermine
investigations and that "unfair leaks" were an "added" consideration in
the Midyear investigation. Laufman told us that the Midyear prosecution
team's goal was to make sure that no stone was left unturned, while also
being mindful that leaks "could be used by political actors in
furtherance of political agendas." Agent 3 told us that when he sought
process from the prosecutors, they responded that they would try to
obtain the evidence by consent because the witnesses "don't want this to
get in the paper." Comey told us that he believed the prosecutors were
more hesitant to use criminal process in the Midyear investigation than
normal because they wanted to keep "as low a profile as possible."

FBI team members told us that they believed they could have obtained
evidence faster with process, especially after instances when, they
believed, Clinton's attorneys had not been forthcoming about the
existence of potential sources of evidence. For example, after Clinton's
attorneys voluntarily provided the FBI the Pagliano Server pursuant to
an August 7, 2015 consent agreement, the FBI discovered through its own
investigation that there was a successor server---the PRN server.
According to documentation we reviewed, the prosecutors and the FBI were
frustrated that Clinton's attorneys had not been forthcoming about the
PRN server, and Prosecutor 1 wrote a letter to Kendall expressing this
frustration. The SSA told us that situations like this caused him to
question whether consent was the best course. However, Prosecutor 1
stated that resorting to compulsory process for the PRN server would
have been complicated, because, among other things, the server was
"running tons of people's email accounts on it that were totally
separate from.the former Secretary, including people working in
the.former President's office." The Midyear team ultimately secured
the PRN server through a September 30, 2015 consent agreement with
Clinton's attorneys.

Some witnesses told us that they were concerned about certain devices
that the FBI was never able to locate. For example, as described above
in Section II of this chapter, the Midyear team was never able to locate
the Archive Laptop and Archive Thumb Drive, both of which, according to
Hanley and others, contained a complete copy of Clinton's archived
emails. In addition, according to the LHM, the FBI's investigation
identified a total of 13 mobile devices associated with Clinton's two
known telephone numbers "which potentially were used to send emails
using Clinton's clintonemail.com email addresses." The Midyear team
asked Clinton's attorneys for these devices, but they stated they were
"unable to locate" them.^[^63^](#fn63){#fnref63 .footnote-ref}^
According to the LHM and FD-302s, Cooper and Hanley told the FBI that
they wiped or destroyed Clinton's devices once she transitioned to new
devices. One FBI analyst told us that he was "frustrated" by the claim
by Clinton's attorneys that they could not find her 13 devices. However,
he stated that he "guessed" the agency did not have probable cause
to assert that the missing devices were in Clinton's home such that a
search warrant could be issued, given the testimony that her old devices
had been destroyed before she transitioned to new devices. He further
stated that his frustration was with Clinton and her attorneys, not the
prosecutors.

We questioned whether the use of a subpoena or search warrant might have
encouraged Clinton, her lawyers, Combetta, or others to search harder
for the missing devices, or ensured that they were being honest that
they could not find them. Prosecutor 2 told us that the prosecutors
believed that Clinton's attorneys were dealing with them "in good faith"
and had "no reason to think that they were lying" about their inability
to find Clinton's mobile devices. Prosecutor 2 further stated that the
team did not believe that Combetta still had the Archive Laptop in his
possession, because "there would have been no reason for him to keep
it." Similarly, the Lead Analyst told us that he did not know of any
evidence to suggest that Clinton's attorneys were being dishonest about
the evidence they could not locate, and compulsory process would not
have made a difference in situations where Clinton's attorneys
represented that they could not find a device.

Agents 1 and 2 told us that there were six laptops that Clinton's
attorneys had provided the FBI early in the investigation with consent
to store, but not search, and that they would have liked to search these
laptops. Agent 2 stated that he believed that these laptops may have
been used to review Clinton's emails before Clinton's attorneys produced
her work-related emails to the State

Department. Agent 1 told us that he believed these laptops were used by
Clinton's Williams and Connolly attorneys to do the "QC of the 30,000
emails after they were culled by Mills and Samuelson."

Our review of the relevant FD-302s and other documents revealed the
following regarding the six laptops: On August 6, 2015, Katherine
Turner, one of Clinton's attorneys, voluntarily produced to the FBI
three thumb drives and a laptop computer belonging to Williams and
Connolly that contained identical copies of the 30,490 emails Clinton's
attorneys had produced to the State Department, and signed a consent
form for the FBI to search these devices. In addition, Turner told the
two FBI agents that Williams and Connolly had six additional laptops
containing identical copies of the 30,490 emails, but that these laptops
also contained unrelated privileged information. Turner agreed to
voluntarily produce the additional six laptops to the FBI so that the
FBI could secure the classified information contained on them, but
declined to provide consent to search the laptops because she "wished to
ensure that privileged communications on the laptops would remain
confidential." According to a FD-302 dated August 17, 2015, Turner told
the FBI that one of the six laptops was in the custody of Mills's and

Samuelson's attorneys at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton, and Garrison,
LLP ("Paul Weiss"). On August 21, 2015, FBI Attorney 1 wrote in a letter
to Turner and a Paul Weiss attorney:

It is the FBI's understanding that the six laptop computers may contain
privileged materials. Therefore, the FBI will maintain the six laptop
computers in a secure location separate from other materials that have
been provided voluntarily to the FBI in conjunction with this matter.
The FBI will not access any material or information on the six laptops
without further consultation with you or obtaining appropriate legal
process.

Upon completion of this matter, the FBI will notify all parties and
discuss the appropriate disposition of the material in a manner
consistent with applicable laws and policies.

Although the Midyear team left open the possibility of obtaining process
to search the six laptops, the team ultimately never sought a search
warrant. Prosecutor 2 explained that the Midyear team originally
believed that the six laptops included the laptops that Mills and
Samuelson used to cull Clinton's emails. However, during a proffer
session on March 19, 2016, Beth Wilkinson (attorney for Mills and
Samuelson) told the prosecutors that the six laptops Clinton's attorneys
had produced to the FBI did not include the culling laptops and, in
fact, the culling laptops were still in Mills's and Samuelson's
possession. Prosecutor 2 told us that, following the proffer, Mills and
Samuelson turned the actual culling laptops over to Wilkinson, who
agreed to disconnect the laptops from the Internet and place them in a
safe in her office, until privilege issues could be resolved. As
described in Section VIII.D of this chapter, the Midyear team ultimately
received consent to search the culling laptops through an agreement with
Wilkinson. Agent 2 told us that, despite his desire to search the
content of the six laptops, the FBI might not have had sufficient
probable cause to assert that the laptops contained emails that the FBI
did not already have in its possession. He further told us that it was
"completely logical" that Clinton's attorneys would not consent to the
FBI's review of the laptops given that the laptops contained privileged
information related to the attorneys' representation of other clients.
FBI Attorney 1 told us that she believed, based on the representations
of Clinton's counsel, that the six laptops never contained the full
62,320 emails and that they only contained copies of the 30,490 emails
that had been produced to the State Department. She stated that, as a
result, she did not believe that it was necessary to review the six
laptops, especially given the privilege concerns.

There were points in the investigation when the debate about the use of
consent versus compulsory process was particularly pronounced. Based on
the evidence we reviewed, in or about March 2016, Page asked Strzok, on
behalf of McCabe, to create a list of tasks that the Department had
either refused to undertake or "asked to let them negotiate with
counsel," even if the FBI ultimately agreed with the outcome. Page told
us that McCabe suggested the list after she told him that Strzok and FBI
Attorney 1 were "increasingly growing concerned about.the little
things that are being left on the cutting room floor and.the
deference to" the line prosecutors on how best to obtain evidence. On
March 24, 2016, Strzok wrote to FBI Attorney 1 and the Lead Analyst
describing the proposed list.^[^64^](#fn64){#fnref64 .footnote-ref}^ In
the email, Strzok provided a rough list of the items he was considering
including and wrote, "Problem is it's been death by a thousand
cuts."^72^ Strzok told us that at the time he wrote this email, he was
"aggravated by the limitations" that the prosecutors were placing on the
FBI's ability to obtain evidence and felt that "if you add up this delta
over a bunch of decisions, all of a sudden it becomes substantive."
Strzok and Page told us that they did not believe a list was ever
finalized.

Despite this debate, the agents, analysts, prosecutors, and supervisors
on the Midyear team generally told us that, aside from devices that had
been destroyed or that could not be located, they ultimately obtained
and reviewed all of the devices necessary to complete the investigation.
For example, Strzok stated that once he was able to "step back towards
the end of the investigation," he realized that "maybe we gave a little
where we didn't need to give, and maybe we actually got lucky here. But
is there anything that we ultimately are missing to make kind of an
authoritative, accurate conclusion? No." McCabe stated that the team
"drew some red lines around things that we absolutely insisted we had to
do," such as obtaining the laptops Mills and Samuelson used to cull
Clinton's emails, and that those items ultimately were attained. The
SSA, who was described to us by several witnesses as an experienced and
aggressive agent, stated that he "had a lot of hoops to jump through at
times," but "no matter what the obstacles were, we moved through them."
Similarly, Anderson told us, "At various points.as the investigation
progressed.we were very anxious to.seek aggressively different
materials.. But at the end of the day, I do believe everybody
felt that we had obtained everything that we needed to obtain in order
to assess criminality."

**B. Limits of Consent Agreements**

The SSA told us that the terms of the consent agreements were primarily
created through negotiations between the two line NSD prosecutors, on
one side, and the attorneys for Clinton and other witnesses, on the
other. For the most part, the consent agreements were limited such that
the FBI was able to search only for emails sent or received by Clinton
during her tenure as Secretary of State and for evidence of intrusion.
These were generally the same limitations that were included in the
subpoenas, search warrants, and 2703(d) orders obtained during the
course of the investigation.

received" by the Department. Strzok stated that his understanding was
that McCabe wanted to discuss the items in the list with Toscas during a
"sidebar," rather than in a "big, official meeting." ^72^ The items in
the rough list were:

1.  getting process .. at the beginning (the fight about opening a case,
    about assigning a field office and a usao for process)
2.  a\) media (consent vs SWs for all the servers and devices and games
    opposing counsel played), There is a ton here, from everything we have
    vs the stuff we didnt get \~ eg, apple server at Chappaqua, computer at
    Whitehaven, plethora of ipads, lack of blackberries, b) scoping and
    negotiating of what we\'ve been able to search for
3.  email accounts (thinking Mills Gmail account)
4.  interviews (v FGJ compellence) and scoping of interviews. - I think
    that largely applies to PRN and the big four+Samuelson, right?
    Anyone else?

An FBI analyst told us that limiting the search time period to Clinton's
tenure as Secretary was not controversial. The analyst explained,
"The reason it was scoped to the tenure is because.that is of
course when she would have had access to the classified information." We
questioned both Department and FBI witnesses as to whether emails from
after Clinton's tenure could have shed light on whether Clinton
instructed her staff to delete emails for an improper purpose. They told
us that any relevant emails following Clinton's tenure mostly would
consist of communications with her attorneys regarding the sort process,
and such communications would be protected by attorney-client privilege.

The consent agreements and search warrants also were limited such that
the FBI could not search emails sent or received by other accountholders
on Clinton's servers---such as Abedin and former President Clinton and
his staff---unless Clinton was also a party to those emails. One analyst
told us that he would have liked to be able to look at emails to which
Clinton was not a party. For example, he told us that he would have
liked to review emails between Abedin and Cooper regarding what Clinton
may have said about the server. We questioned the prosecutors as to why
the consent agreements were not scoped such that they could search for
any work-related or classified emails within Abedin's clintonemail.com
account, especially since FBI witnesses told us that Clinton's server,
not Clinton herself, was the subject of the investigation. This is
addressed in Section V.D of this chapter below.

The consent agreements and search warrants incorporated provisions
requiring the use of a filter team to ensure that the Midyear team did
not review emails protected by privileges, including attorney-client,
medical, and marital privileges. One analyst told us that the filter
process was cumbersome and that some interpretations of the privileges
were unusual. For example, because former President Clinton did not use
email, one of his employees received former President Clinton's emails
and then printed them for him. The privilege team considered the emails
that Clinton sent to her husband through this employee as privileged,
although this may not have been legally required. The Lead Analyst told
us that he, too, was often frustrated by the cumbersome filter process.
However, he stated that he agreed with the team's "conservative"
approach to interpreting what was privileged, because it was important
for the FBI to handle its mission and the materials in its possession
"responsibly" and to not unnecessarily be looking "into the lives of the
Clintons."

There were at least two consent agreements that did not incorporate the
use of a filter team, but instead allowed the attorney for the owner of
the devices to delete personal information before voluntary production
to the FBI. These were the consent agreements that the Department
negotiated with Justin Cooper's attorney to obtain Cooper's personal
laptops that the team hoped contained, among other things, back-ups from
the BlackBerry devices Clinton used during the first two months of her
tenure.^[^65^](#fn65){#fnref65 .footnote-ref}^ According to the FD-302
from Cooper's September 2, 2015 interview, Cooper's attorney told the
FBI that Cooper's laptops contained "files related to the upgrade of
former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's Blackberry," as well as
emails Cooper exchanged with Clinton. In a letter dated September 10,
2015, Cooper's attorney wrote to Prosecutor 1, "As we discussed and as
the government has agreed, before providing Mr. Cooper's computer
hardware to the FBI, we will remove and securely delete Mr. Cooper's
personal and business files." In a letter dated September 24, 2015,
Cooper's attorney wrote to Prosecutor 1 that he was voluntarily
providing the FBI Cooper's Mac Book Air laptop computer and further
wrote, "as agreed, we have securely deleted from the Mac Book Air
Mr. Cooper's personal and business files, and we have overwritten its
unallocated space with zeros."

We asked some FBI and Department witnesses why they did not use a filter
team instead of allowing Cooper to delete his personal files. FBI
witnesses told us that they were not concerned by the limitations in the
consent agreements for the Cooper laptops, because Cooper was
particularly cooperative and the materials he voluntarily provided to
the FBI turned out to be fruitful.^74^ Indeed, according to the FD-302
from Cooper's interview, Cooper's attorney told the FBI about the
back-ups on Cooper's laptop without prompting. In addition, FBI Attorney
1 and Agent 1 told us that they considered Cooper's devices to be
different from other devices they reviewed, because there was no
evidence that Cooper was the sender or recipient of classified
information and Cooper was more of an aide to former President Clinton
than to former Secretary Clinton. Strzok told us that the team was not
certain that it could establish probable cause that there was classified
information or other evidence of a crime on the Cooper laptops.

Some FBI witnesses told us, consistent with text message exchanges
between Strzok and Page, that the FBI was concerned that the line NSD
prosecutors were intimidated by the high-powered attorneys representing
Clinton and her senior aides and, as a result, did not negotiate
aggressively with them. Strzok told us that Prosecutor 1, who handled
most of the negotiations with counsel, is "extraordinarily competent,"
but he believed more senior government officials should have been
involved with deciding "how hard to push counsel." Nevertheless, the
FBI witnesses generally told us that they were satisfied that the
limitations of the consent agreements did not impair the investigation.
Agent 2 stated regarding the limitations in consent agreements, "I think
generally.we were able to get what we were looking for. It maybe was
more complicated, timeconsuming, and cumbersome." The Lead Analyst told
us that "every single consent arrangement constrained what we did.to
some degree." However, he, Strzok, and FBI Attorney 1 all told us that
they believed the team might have actually obtained

her tenure, and Midyear officials believed these missing emails could
contain important evidence regarding Clinton's intent in setting up a
private email server.

^74^ For example, one analyst told us that within the Blackberry
back-ups on the Cooper laptop, the FBI team found an email from former
Secretary of State Colin Powell to Clinton on January 23, 2009, in which
Powell warned Clinton that if it became "public" that she used a
Blackberry to "do business," her emails could become "official
records and subject to the law." In the email, Powell further warned
Clinton, "Be very careful. I got around it all by not saying much and
not using systems that captured the data."

more through the consent agreements in some instances than they would
have obtained through compulsory process. Strzok explained that for some
devices they were not certain that the team could establish sufficient
probable cause to convince a judge to issue a search warrant or allow a
search that was as broad as what was agreed upon through a consent
agreement. He provided as an example the Cooper laptops described above.
Similarly, Prosecutor 2 told us that the Midyear team was able to search
certain items through consent agreements, despite privilege issues that
may have caused a subpoena or search warrant to be quashed.

In addition, based on our review, we determined that Department and FBI
members of the Midyear team worked together to determine the scope of
the review of the evidence and, in turn, the limitations to be included
in consent agreements and search warrants. For example, in a September
23, 2015 email exchange among a WFO Computer Analysis and Recovery Team
forensic examiner ("CART Examiner"), Strzok, the Lead Analyst, the four
line prosecutors, three FBI OGC attorneys, and two case agents,
Prosecutor 2 wrote that she assumed the consent agreement for the PRN
server would be scoped such that the FBI would not review the content of
any emails in domains other than the clintonemail.com domain. Strzok
wrote back with a more expansive approach than that suggested by
Prosecutor 2: "I think we would ask to search the other domains for any
emails to/from the \@clintonemail.com domain in the event those emails
were deleted from whichever clintonemail.com account and no longer
available there." The final consent agreement followed Strzok's more
expansive approach, allowing the FBI to search the entire server,
including the unallocated space and domains other than the
clintonemail.com domain, for any emails to or from Clinton.

None of the witnesses we interviewed could point to specific examples of
anyone involved in the investigation allowing political or other
improper considerations to impact the decisions on how best to obtain
evidence.

**V. Efforts to Obtain Email Content from the Private Accounts of
Clinton's Senior Aides**

In this section, we address the Midyear team's efforts to obtain email
content from the accounts of the three senior aides that had the most
email communication with Clinton---Jake Sullivan, Cheryl Mills, and Huma
Abedin. Sullivan was Clinton's Deputy Chief of Staff for Policy from
January 2009 to February 2011 and Director of

Policy and Planning at the State Department from February 2011 to
January 2013; Mills served as, among other things, Clinton's Chief of
Staff during Clinton's tenure as Secretary; and Abedin served as
Clinton's Deputy Chief of Staff during Clinton's tenure. According to
the LHM, the FBI discovered through its review of emails from various
sources that only 13 individuals had direct email contact with Clinton,
and that Sullivan, Abedin, and Mills "accounted for 68 percent of the
emails sent directly to Clinton."^[^66^](#fn66){#fnref66 .footnote-ref}^
State Department employees told the FBI that they considered emailing
Sullivan, Mills, or Abedin the equivalent of emailing Clinton directly.

In addition to examining emails to or from these senior aides within the
original 30,490 emails produced to the State Department, the
investigators obtained emails from the State Department for each of
their official State classified and unclassified email accounts. Based
on a review of these emails and other evidence, the investigators
determined that, in addition to their official State email accounts,
Sullivan and Mills used personal Gmail accounts and Abedin used a
personal Yahoo! account and her clintonemail.com account to conduct
government business. Sullivan, Mills, and Abedin told the FBI that they
used their private email accounts for official business occasionally,
including on occasions when the official State email system was not
functioning properly. Sullivan stated that he had the most difficulty
using the official State system when he was traveling and on the
weekends.

The investigators further determined that all three of these senior
aides either sent or received classified information on their private
email accounts and forwarded emails containing classified information to
Clinton, although none of the emails the FBI discovered contained
classification markings. The three aides provided the following
explanations to the FBI for their conduct: they did not believe the
information contained in their emails was classified; they tried to talk
around classified information in situations where there was an urgent
need to convey information and they did not have access to classified
systems; some of the information they were discussing had already
appeared in news reports; and they relied on the originators of the
emails to properly mark them. These explanations were consistent with
those provided to the FBI by both the originators of the emails
containing classified information and Clinton. Based in part on these
explanations, the prosecutors determined that no one "within the scope
of the investigation," including the three senior aides, "committed any
criminal offenses."

Nonetheless, the investigators considered obtaining additional
information from or about the private email accounts of all three senior
aides. Emails sent to or from the private email accounts were
potentially relevant to: (1) further reconstructing the full collection
of work-related emails and emails containing classified information that
were sent to or from Clinton's servers; (2) finding additional emails
containing classified information that were transmitted and stored on
unclassified systems other than the Clinton's servers; (3) finding
evidence of knowledge or intent on the part of Clinton, the senior
aides, and possibly others regarding the transmission or storage of
classified information on unclassified systems; (4) controlling the
spill of classified information in unauthorized locations; and (5)
assessing whether there had been a compromise of classified information
by hostile actors through intrusion analysis.

The Midyear team obtained 2703(d) orders for noncontent information in
Mills's Gmail account and Abedin's Yahoo! account and a search warrant
for Sullivan's personal Gmail account. However, the Midyear team did not
obtain search warrants to examine the content of emails in Mills's or
Abedin's private email accounts and did not seek to obtain any of the
senior aides' personal devices.^[^67^](#fn67){#fnref67 .footnote-ref}^

**A. Section 2703(d) Orders for Non-Content Information for Mills's and
Abedin's Private Email Accounts**

On February 18, 2016, the FBI obtained a 2703(d) order for Abedin's
personal Yahoo! account. According to the government's application for
the 2703(d) order, the FBI discovered that on October 4, 2009, an email
attaching a Word document without classification markings was forwarded
from Abedin's unclassified State Department email account to her Yahoo!
account. The application stated that the next day, "the text from this
Word document, with slight edits and reformatted to State Department
letterhead, was sent from a State Department employee on SIPRNet, a
classified email system, to Cheryl Mills" with a classification marking
of SECRET//NOFORN. As a basis for the 2703(d) order, the application
stated that a review of the 2703(d) returns would "help the FBI
determine if the aforementioned email, containing a classified Word
document, still resides within the Subject Account maintained by Huma
Abedin and whether there are other records connecting email accounts
associated with the improper transmission and storage of classified
information."

Similarly, on May 31, 2016, the FBI sought and obtained a 2703(d) order
for

Mills's personal Gmail account. According to the government's
application for the 2703(d) order, the FBI discovered that Mills sent or
received at least 911 workrelated emails to or from her Gmail account
during the time she was employed at the State Department. The
application stated that the FBI identified seven emails containing
confirmed classified information and an additional 208 emails containing
suspected classified information that had not yet undergone formal
classification review. The application provided as an example one email
that was determined to be classified at the level of SECRET//NOFORN at
the time the email was sent. None of the emails contained classification
markings.

We were told by an analyst who focused on handling legal process, and
the notes of Strzok and the Lead Analyst from late May and early June
2016 confirmed, that the returns from the 2703(d) orders for Mills's and
Abedin's accounts revealed that neither the confirmed classified emails
nor any emails to or from Clinton continued to reside in Mills's or
Abedin's personal accounts as of the date Google and Yahoo! searched
their servers. According to Strzok's and the Lead Analyst's notes,
Abedin's email account contained less than 100 emails from Clinton's
tenure as Secretary of State, while Mills's account contained numerous
emails from Clinton's tenure as Secretary of State. Prosecutor 2 and one
FBI analyst told us that these results provided no basis to conclude
that Mills or Abedin had deleted emails to or from Clinton for an
improper purpose, because there are various factors that could
contribute to the preservation of emails in a personal email
account.^[^68^](#fn68){#fnref68 .footnote-ref}^

**B. Decisions Regarding Search Warrants for Private Email Accounts**

The Midyear team obtained a search warrant for Sullivan's Gmail account,
on September 17, 2015. According to the search warrant, in reviewing the
30,490 emails provided by Clinton's attorneys to the State Department,
the FBI found Sullivan's electronic business card, which identified him
as an employee of the State Department and listed his private Gmail
address. The search warrant stated that the FBI also had identified,
among the 30,490 emails produced to the State Department, an unmarked
email determined to contain information classified at the TOP SECRET
level at the time it was forwarded by another State Department employee
to Sullivan's Gmail account. The search warrant further stated that the
FBI had identified an additional 496 emails from Sullivan's personal
Gmail account that it suspected contained classified information, but
had not yet submitted for formal classification review. One analyst told
us that unlike the emails found on

Clinton's servers, which often were derived from the unallocated space,
emails from Sullivan's Gmail account were helpful because they clearly
revealed important metadata, such as senders, recipients, and dates.

Given the significant roles of Mills and Abedin, and the usefulness of
the material from Sullivan's personal account, we asked why the
investigators did not seek search warrants for the private accounts of
Mills or Abedin. We learned that the SSA initially drafted a search
warrant affidavit for Mills's personal Gmail account, but it was never
filed. In an email to FBI Attorney 1 and the Lead Analyst dated March
25, 2016, Strzok listed "email accounts (thinking Mills Gmail account)"
as an item that the FBI unsuccessfully sought from the prosecutors.
Strzok, the SSA, and Agent 3 told us that Strzok advocated in favor of
applying for the search warrant, but that the prosecutors rejected the
affidavit in favor of a 2703(d) order, based on insufficient probable
cause and privilege concerns. The SSA stated that he disagreed with the
prosecutors' position that there was insufficient probable cause for a
search warrant, because there was evidence that Mills's Gmail account
was used for official business and contained classified information.

Nevertheless, Prosecutor 2 told us that the FBI never made a follow-up
request for a search warrant after receiving the 2703(d) returns. As
discussed above, according to Strzok's and the Lead Analyst's notes and
other evidence, the

Midyear team received the 2703(d) returns in late May and early June
2016 and learned that neither the classified emails nor any emails to or
from Clinton continued to reside in either account. Prosecutors 1 and 2
told us that, based on the facts developed at that point, there was
likely no probable cause to seek a search warrant. Strzok stated about
the proposed search warrant for Mills's Gmail account, "I remember we
did not get it, and my general recollection is, if we thought it was
important, and.we could have gotten probable cause, we would have
done it. I think we just couldn't establish PC probable cause."

Some FBI witnesses told us that there were reasons to promptly seek a
search warrant for Sullivan's Gmail account, instead of beginning with a
2703(d) order like they did with the private email accounts belonging to
Mills and Abedin. They stated that unlike Sullivan, Mills and Abedin had
not, based on the evidence they had reviewed, sent or received TS-SAP
emails on their personal accounts, and these were the most sensitive
emails discovered during the investigation. One analyst stated that
Clinton's email exchanges with Sullivan were more substantive than her
email exchanges with both Abedin and Mills. In addition, witnesses told
us, consistent with the FD-302s we reviewed, that Sullivan was a more
regular user of personal email for conducting State business, in part
because he traveled overseas more often than the others.

Prosecutor 2 told us that Sullivan was treated differently from Mills
and Abedin, because the information contained in the Top Secret email
sent to Sullivan more clearly constituted classified information and NDI
("national defense information") than the information contained in the
emails sent or received by Mills and Abedin.^[^69^](#fn69){#fnref69
.footnote-ref}^ Prosecutor 2 stated, "There was a fundamental
difference in the nature of information that we knew was in Jake
Sullivan's account, versus the information that was in Abedin's account
and Mills's accounts." In addition, Prosecutor 2 told us that the
prosecutors would have had to obtain Criminal Division approval to
obtain a search warrant for Mills's Gmail account, given that she was an
attorney. Prosecutor 2 told us that, while they would have sought the
approval if they believed it was "appropriate," this was among the
factors they considered in "deciding what process to use."

**C. Access to Personal Devices for Clinton's Senior Aides**

Another potential means to obtain emails to or from the private accounts
of Clinton's senior aides would be to obtain access to their personal
devices, such as laptops or cellular telephones, on which copies of such
emails might reside. Such access could possibly have been obtained by
consent or via search warrant.^[^70^](#fn70){#fnref70 .footnote-ref}^ As
described in Section VIII.D of this chapter, the Midyear team obtained,
through consent agreements with Beth Wilkinson, the laptops that Mills
and Samuelson used to cull Clinton's emails for production of her
work-related emails to the State Department. However, the investigators
did not seek access to the private devices used by Sullivan, Mills, or
Abedin during Clinton's tenure at State.^[^71^](#fn71){#fnref71
.footnote-ref}^

Witnesses told us that the team's focus was on Clinton and obtaining her
devices, such as her servers, computers, and hand-held devices.
Prosecutor 2 stated, "The scope of the investigation really related
to the email systems used by Secretary Clinton, and whether on her
private email server there are individuals who improperly retained or
transmitted classified information." According to one analyst, there
were generally two types of devices that the team sought: devices that
Clinton used and devices to which her emails were transferred.

We asked several witnesses why they did not obtain devices used by
Sullivan, Mills, and Abedin, both as a means of searching for evidence
of the mishandling of classified information by Clinton and her aides
and to prevent a further compromise of classified information. Both
Strzok and Anderson told us that, at the outset of the investigation,
former Deputy Director Giuliano generally advised the team that the
purpose of the investigation was not to follow every potential lead of
classified information. Strzok stated that Giuliano told the team,
"This is not going to become some octopus.. The focus of the
investigation is the appearance of classified information on
Clinton's personal emails and that server during the time she was
Secretary of State." Strzok further stated that the FBI's "purpose and
mission" was not to pursue "spilled classified information to the
ends of the earth" and that the task of cleaning up classified spills by
State Department employees was referred back to the State Department. He
told us that the FBI's focus was whether there was a "violation of
federal law." Prosecutors 1 and 2 similarly told us that the Department
was not conducting a spill investigation, and that the State Department
was the better entity for that role. Prosecutor 1 stated, "At a certain
point, you have to decide what's your criminal investigation, and what
is like a spill investigation.. We could spend like a decade
tracking emails.wherever they went." The SSA told us that the Midyear
team engaged in several conversations with the State Department
regarding the spill of classified information, and the State Department
officials expressed concern about the problem and were receptive to
resolving it. Generally the witnesses told us that they could not
remember anyone within the team arguing that more should have been done
to obtain the senior aides' devices.

We specifically questioned why the team did not attempt to obtain any
personal devices used by Huma Abedin, given the team's finding that
numerous work-related and classified email exchanges between Abedin and
Clinton that the Midyear team found through various sources were absent
from the 30,490 emails produced to the State Department by Clinton's
lawyers. Witnesses told us that they believed there was a flaw in the
culling process, which resulted in the exclusion of most of Abedin's
clintonemail.com emails from the State Department
production.^[^72^](#fn72){#fnref72 .footnote-ref}^ We also questioned
(1) the failure to obtain Abedin's devices despite that, according to
Abedin's FD-302, Abedin told the FBI that she turned both her personal
laptop and her personal Blackberry over to her attorneys to be reviewed
for production of work-related emails to the State Department; and (2)
the inconsistency between the decision not to seek Abedin's devices
before the July declination and the decision to obtain a search warrant
for email on the laptop belonging to her husband, Anthony Weiner, in
October 2016.

In response to the OIG's questions regarding the Midyear team's decision
not to obtain the senior aides' devices, Prosecutor 1 told us that he
did not remember any "meaningful discussion" before October 2016 about
obtaining the senior aides' devices, aside from the laptops used by
Mills and Samuelson to cull Clinton's emails for production of her
work-related emails to the State Department. The SSA told us that in the
beginning of the investigation, the Midyear team wanted to obtain every
device that touched the server, but that over time the team realized
that this would not be "fruitful." He stated that OTD personnel told the
team that "it was not likely that there would be anything on the
devices" themselves. Some FBI witnesses told us that they asked the
senior aides during their Midyear interviews about any personal devices
they used for State Department work, and the Midyear team relied on
their responses to determine what devices to obtain. Agent 3 told us
that the Midyear team asked Abedin whether she backed up her
clintonemail.com emails and she responded that her email was
"cloud-based" and she did not "know how to back up her archives." He
stated that based on this testimony, the team assessed that finding
helpful evidence on Abedin's devices was unlikely.

Both Strzok and Prosecutor 2 told us that the decision not to obtain the
senior aides' devices was a joint decision. Prosecutors 1 and 2 and
Strzok further told us that the team did not obtain Abedin's personal
laptop and Blackberry that she used during her employment at the State
Department, even after she told the FBI that she gave those devices to
her attorneys, because the State Department provided to the FBI Abedin's
work-related emails that her attorneys produced from those devices.
Strzok stated that Abedin's attorneys told the Midyear team that they
erred on the side of overproducing Abedin's emails to the State
Department and that, unlike the sort process for Clinton's emails by
Mills and Samuelson, there was no reason to believe Abedin's attorneys'
sort process was flawed. Prosecutor 2 told us, consistent with notes
this prosecutor took at a meeting on October 27, 2016, that the only
reason the FBI later obtained the Weiner laptop was because "it had
ended up in our laps." We describe this issue further in Chapters Nine,
Ten, and Eleven.

Several witnesses told us that tracking down Clinton's devices alone was
very challenging. They stated that the investigation would have taken
years if the team attempted to seek every possible device that might
contain Clinton's emails or classified material. For example, Prosecutor
2 stated:

I think the idea was that, that this investigation had to be somewhat
focused, otherwise it could spin off into a million different
directions. And this investigation could take different forms for years
and years and years to come. So, you know, the, the focus of the
investigation was, was really the private email system.

Agent 3 told us that the team focused on Clinton's devices because they
were the most likely to have the full tranche of missing emails from
Clinton's servers, whereas the devices of any one person would only have
a "fraction" of them.

Midyear team members further told us that they placed limits on their
investigation based on practical considerations, including what they
observed to be systemic problems with handling classified information at
the State Department. They stated that they discovered persistent
practices of State Department employees, including both political and
career employees, discussing classified information on both unclassified
government email accounts and personal email accounts, and that this
culture predated Clinton's tenure as Secretary of State. In addition,
FBI Attorney 1 told us that the emails containing classified information
that were forwarded to Clinton often originally copied numerous State
Department and other government agency employees, some of whom could
have forwarded them to other unclassified locations besides the chain
that ultimately led to Clinton's server. Witnesses told us that these
factors made it impractical for them to search every email account or
device that classified emails may have traversed.

**D. Review of Abedin's Emails on the Clinton Server**

Abedin was the only State Department employee, besides Clinton, with an
account on the clintonemail.com domain on Clinton's server. Witnesses
told us and documents we reviewed showed that the Midyear team did not
review all of Abedin's clintonemail.com emails on the server; rather,
they limited their searches to her email exchanges with Clinton. We
questioned why this limitation was put in place, given that the purpose
of the investigation was to generally assess any mishandling of
classified information in relation to Clinton's
server.^[^73^](#fn73){#fnref73 .footnote-ref}^

Several witnesses told us that they did not seek to review all of
Abedin's emails because her role was administrative in nature. While
witnesses told us that Abedin had possibly the most contact with Clinton
and sometimes forwarded or printed substantive work-related emails to or
for Clinton, she was never an originator of classified materials, she
did not typically use classified systems, she did not receive or forward
the particularly sensitive information, and she did not comment
substantively on classified information that was contained in the emails
she forwarded. Prosecutor 1 explained that the team was not "as
concerned that Abedin was taking stuff off the classified systems
and dumping it down." These factors also contributed to the decision not
to obtain a search warrant for content from Abedin's Yahoo! account.

However, during a review of the Weiner laptop in October and November

2016, the FBI discovered unmarked classified emails that Abedin had
forwarded to Weiner. During an FBI interview on January 6, 2017, Abedin
acknowledged that she "occasionally" forwarded work-related emails to
her husband for printing.

**E. Decision Not to Seek Access to Certain Highly Classified
Information**

As detailed in the classified appendix to this report, the OIG learned
late in our review that the FBI considered seeking access to certain
highly classified materials that may have included information
potentially relevant to the Midyear investigation, but ultimately did
not do so.^83^ In late May 2016, FBI Attorney 1 drafted a memorandum
stating that review of the classified materials was necessary to
complete the Midyear investigation and requesting permission to review
them.

The FBI never finalized the May 2016 memorandum or received access to
these classified materials for purposes of the Midyear
investigation.^84^ FBI witnesses told us that this was for various
reasons, including that they believed that the classified materials were
unlikely to include information from the beginning of former Secretary
Clinton's tenure, and thus would not have a material impact on the
investigation. However, other FBI witnesses including Strzok, the Lead
Analyst, and the SSA told us that reviewing the materials would have
been a logical investigative step.

information. I just don't understand why that us sic not enough to
look at all her emails." Baker told us that he believed the team had
probable cause to look at all of Abedin's clintonemail.com and Yahoo!
emails, based on the evidence that classified information had traversed
both private email accounts.

83. The OIG also has not reviewed the highly classified information.
84. As we describe in the classified appendix, the FBI sent a memorandum
    to the Department on June 1, 2018, requesting permission to review
    these classified materials for foreign intelligence purposes
    unrelated to the Midyear investigation.

The classified appendix describes in more detail the highly classified
information, its potential relevance to the Midyear investigation, and
the FBI's reasons for not seeking access to it.

**VI. Voluntary Interviews**

According to documents we reviewed, the Midyear team conducted 72
witness interviews. The witnesses included individuals involved with
setting up and administering Clinton's private servers, State Department
employees, and other individuals with suspected knowledge of Clinton's
email servers, the transmission of classified information on the
servers, or her intent. Based on our review, we determined that all
witnesses were interviewed voluntarily or pursuant to immunity
agreements and, consistent with the FBI's normal procedures, none of the
witnesses were placed under oath or recorded.^[^74^](#fn74){#fnref74
.footnote-ref}^ No witnesses testified before the grand jury.

The FBI and Department witnesses we interviewed told us that the Midyear
team, including agents, analysts, the SSA, Strzok, the Lead Analyst, and
line prosecutors worked together to decide whom to interview and the
sequencing of witness interviews, without seeking approval from higher
level Department or FBI officials. Agent 1 stated that the initial
strategizing on whom to interview generally occurred at the level of the
SSA and below. The SSA and most of the case agents told us that they did
not recall any significant disputes over whom to interview and that they
were never told by higher level managers, including Strzok, or
Department employees, including the prosecutors, not to interview
particular witnesses that they believed were essential to the
investigation. Similarly, the prosecutors told us that their chain of
command did not seek to influence the team's decisions on whom to
interview. Toscas told us that the prosecutors made him aware of
upcoming important interviews and he briefed that information up the
chain, but he and higher level Department officials were not involved in
deciding whom to interview.

FBI witnesses told us that the agents and analysts worked together to
determine what questions to ask to witnesses, and that the analysts
prepared packets of documents to use as exhibits. The SSA and the case
agents told us that their supervisors were involved in strategy sessions
before interviews and in editing and suggesting potential questions, but
did not dictate the process and never forbade them from asking
particular questions. They also told us that for more significant
witnesses, the line prosecutors reviewed their interview outlines and
suggested eliminating questions based on privilege, relevance, or a
scope that had been agreed upon with the witness's counsel. The SSA
stated that the prosecutors' review of the questions did not cause
"friction" and that the process was "fairly seamless." The prosecutors
told us that higher level Department officials were not involved in
deciding what questions to ask witnesses.

Witnesses told us and the FD-302s indicated that the case agents led the
interviews, and prosecutors and supervisors only attended when witnesses
were represented by counsel or particularly significant. According to
documents we reviewed, Strzok attended the interviews of five key
witnesses---Abedin, Mills, Samuelson, Sullivan, and Clinton. He stated
that he only attended these interviews because Laufman insisted on
attending them, and he believed that as Laufman's counterpart at the FBI
he should attend them as well. Laufman told us that he attended the
interviews that he believed were "potentially the most consequential,"
because of the "enormous implications" and "potential consequences" of
the Midyear investigation and to ensure that no one involved in the
investigation went "off in a direction that wasn't consistent with a
purely independent, investigative, impartial approach." He further told
us that he wanted to be involved in key interviews in order to make his
own assessment of the witnesses' credibility and gain a full picture of
the investigation, so that he could make an informed judgment at the end
of the investigation as to whether to accept the FBI's and prosecutors'
recommendations. Prosecutor 1 told us that the Midyear agents were
"very, very diligent and most of them were very good interpersonally,"
and that the prosecutors only interjected occasionally during
interviews.

We were told that the decision to conduct voluntary interviews rather
than subpoenaing witnesses before the grand jury was not controversial
or unusual. FBI agents and prosecutors told us that their usual practice
is to interview witnesses voluntarily and only resort to grand jury if
witnesses are uncooperative or not credible. They further told us that
the Midyear witnesses were mostly cooperative and credible and that
using the grand jury would have been complicated given the sensitive,
classified information involved. Prosecutors 1 and 2 and Agent 1 told us
that not calling any witnesses before the grand jury was common in
mishandling investigations, because doing so would typically require
grand jurors to learn about classified information. Before introducing
classified information to the grand jury, prosecutors must obtain
approval from the USIC agency that was responsible for classifying the
information.^[^75^](#fn75){#fnref75 .footnote-ref}^ Prosecutor 1
explained that although "you can put classified information in front
of the grand jury, you really would like to avoid that because
you\'re basically exposing people that aren\'t going to be cleared to
the information." Agent 1 stated that he had specialized in
investigations concerning the loss of classified information since
approximately 2008 and during that time he had only been involved in one
or two investigations where witnesses were subpoenaed to testify before
the grand jury. Agent 4 told us that voluntary interviews are better
than the grand jury for "rapport-building" and obtaining information.

Prosecutor 1 told us that the prosecutors were prepared to issue grand
jury subpoenas for any witnesses that refused to voluntarily submit to
interviews, for situations where they believed witnesses were
untruthful, or for situations where witnesses provided statements that
would be helpful in a later prosecution and the team wanted to "lock
them in." While all witnesses ultimately submitted to voluntary
interviews, the team issued a grand jury subpoena for Paul Combetta. As
discussed in Section VII.B of this chapter, ultimately the Midyear team
decided that it was unnecessary to question Combetta before the grand
jury.

**VII. Use Immunity Agreements**

The Department entered into letter use or "Queen for a Day" immunity
agreements with three witnesses in the Midyear investigation: Bryan
Pagliano, Paul Combetta, and John Bentel. These immunity agreements and
the specific reasons for them are described in Sections A through C
below. The Department also entered into two act-of-production immunity
agreements in relation to the personal laptops used by Cheryl Mills and
Heather Samuelson to cull Clinton's emails. These are discussed in
Section VIII.D.3 of this Chapter. The Department did not enter into any
transactional immunity agreements.

The prosecutors told us that, in deciding whether to grant use immunity
to a witness, they considered whether the witness had criminal
"exposure" (i.e., whether there were crimes for which the witness could
be prosecuted), the witness's degree of culpability, the value of the
witness's expected testimony, whether there were other sources of the
same information, and whether the grant of immunity would help or hinder
the investigation. Numerous Department and FBI witnesses told us that
they did not oppose the immunity agreements. Some witnesses stated that
there was nothing unusual or troubling about the nature or quantity of
immunity agreements used in the Midyear investigation, especially since
so many witnesses were represented by counsel. Witnesses also told us
that the immunity agreements were approved within the Department through
the level of DAAG Toscas, and that higher level Department and FBI
officials were not involved in negotiating or approving the immunity
agreements. Yates told us that she was briefed about immunity
agreements, but, since she was not made aware of any disagreements
related to them, she did not consider overruling them. Lynch told us
that she generally was not briefed or otherwise involved in immunity
issues.^[^76^](#fn76){#fnref76 .footnote-ref}^

**A. Pagliano**

As previously noted, Bryan Pagliano was an information technology
specialist who worked on Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign and
later set up the Pagliano server, which was the second of the Clinton
Servers. The Midyear team entered into two immunity agreements with
Pagliano: a "Queen for a Day" use immunity agreement on December 22,
2015, and a letter use immunity agreement on December 28, 2015. Based on
our review, the immunity was granted in response to a request by
Pagliano's counsel and resulted in at least two voluntary interviews
that helped inform the FBI's investigation.

Witnesses told us that Pagliano was a critical witness because he set up
the server that Clinton used during her tenure. According to Prosecutor
2, Pagliano was "uniquely positioned" to describe to the FBI the "setup"
and "mechanics" of Clinton's server, as well as to answer questions
regarding possible cyber intrusion. On August 10, 2015, Pagliano's
counsel emailed an FBI agent that he was "not prepared to have Mr.
Pagliano participate in an interview with the FBI- particularly in the
absence of any explanation as to the focus or scope of your prospective
questions." According to an August 27, 2015 email among the prosecutors,
Strzok, the Lead Analyst, and the SSA, Pagliano's attorney had spoken
with Prosecutor 1 and was "insistent on immunity for his client even
though it was explained to him that Pagliano is a witness and not a
target." Prosecutor 3 wrote to the Midyear team, in response to the
request of Pagliano's lawyer, "We're probably going to see this a lot
with any witness who is facing having to be interviewed or testify on
the Hill. We should all sit down and prioritize witnesses to be
interviewed and decide who it's safe to immunize."

According to documents we reviewed, on or about September 4, 2015,

Pagliano's attorneys told the Senate Judiciary Committee and the Senate
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs that he would
exercise his Fifth Amendment rights in response to any questions by the
Committees about his role in setting up Clinton's private email server.
The next day, the Washington Post reported that the Clintons personally
paid Pagliano to support Clinton's private email server while he was
employed at the State Department.^[^77^](#fn77){#fnref77 .footnote-ref}^
According to emails we reviewed, within days of these allegations the
Midyear team took steps to obtain financial information related to
Pagliano from several sources. In addition, the Midyear prosecutors
contacted the Criminal Division's Public Integrity Section (PIN) to
consider whether Pagliano should be prosecuted under 18 U.S.C. § 209 for
receiving outside compensation for government work or for improperly
failing to report outside income on financial disclosure paperwork. On
or about September 9, 2015, Pagliano pleaded his Fifth Amendment right
against selfincrimination in response to questions about the set-up of
Clinton's email server before the House Benghazi Committee.

On December 11, 2015, Prosecutor 2 wrote an email to the other line
prosecutors notifying them that PIN had declined charges against
Pagliano. Then PIN Chief Ray Hulser told us that PIN declined charges
because the PIN prosecutors determined that (1) Pagliano's outside
compensation was for work for the Clintons (primarily former President
Clinton), not for State Department work;^[^78^](#fn78){#fnref78
.footnote-ref}^ and (2) Pagliano reported his compensation from the
Clintons on federal financial disclosure reports before he was told by
the State Department that this was not necessary. Hulser further told us
that PIN's decision to decline charges against Pagliano was not
influenced by the Midyear team's desire to interview Pagliano and that
PIN was never pressured by anyone within the FBI or the Department to
decline charges.

Prosecutor 1 told us that around the same time as PIN's declination, the
team received a proffer from Pagliano's attorney, through which the team
confirmed that Pagliano had important information to provide. Thus, on
December 22, 2015, the Department entered into a "Queen for a Day"
proffer letter with Pagliano. The "Queen for a Day" letter provided that
Pagliano would "answer all questions completely and truthfully,
and.provide all information, documents, and records" within his
custody or control, related to the substance of his interview. In
exchange, the Department agreed that any statements made during his
proffer would not be admitted during the government's case-in-chief or
at sentencing during any future prosecution of Pagliano. The Department
would, though, be able to "make derivative use of, and pursue any leads
suggested by" Pagliano; use his statements for appropriate cross
examination and rebuttal; and prosecute Pagliano for statements or
information that were "false, misleading, or designed to obstruct
justice." The prosecutors told us that they wanted to ensure that
Pagliano was a credible witness and that his statements would be
consistent with his attorney's proffer before offering him the broader
letter use immunity.

Two FBI case agents interviewed Pagliano for the proffer on December 22,
2015, in the presence of all four prosecutors, the CART examiner, and
Pagliano's attorneys. Among other things, Pagliano described the set-up
of the Pagliano server and related equipment, as well as the transition
to the PRN server, to help inform later OTD analysis of those devices.
In addition, Pagliano told the FBI about a late 2009 or early 2010
conversation with Mills in which he conveyed a concern raised by a State
Department Information Technology Specialist that Clinton's use of a
private email server could violate federal records retention laws.
Pagliano told the FBI that Mills responded that former Secretaries of
State, including Colin Powell, had done the same thing. The FBI relied
on this testimony in subsequent interviews, including a later interview
of Mills.^[^79^](#fn79){#fnref79 .footnote-ref}^

The prosecutors and Agent 1 told us that they met afterwards and
everyone agreed that Pagliano was credible and helpful. Prosecutor 1
told us that "everyone assessed that Pagliano was scared but
truthful," and that Pagliano might have been even more nervous and less
forthcoming had he been required to testify in the grand jury, outside
the presence of his attorney. They also agreed that there were some
follow-up questions that would need to be asked. Thus, on December 28,
2015, the Department offered Pagliano "use immunity coextensive with
that granted under 18 U.S.C. § 6001" in exchange for future truthful
court testimony, grand jury testimony, or voluntary interviews related
to the Midyear matter, pursuant to a letter use immunity agreement. The
letter provided that the government would not use any information
directly or indirectly derived from Pagliano's truthful statements or
testimony against him in a future prosecution, "except a prosecution for
perjury, giving a false statement, or any other offense that may be
prosecuted consistent with 18 U.S.C. § 6001."

According to a FD-302 and contemporaneous agent notes, the Midyear team
interviewed Pagliano again on June 21, 2016, and he answered questions
to clarify answers provided during the proffer. For example, Pagliano
told the FBI that he decided not to "implement Transport Layer Security
(TLS) between the Clinton email server and State server," because at the
time he "understood the Clinton email server to be a personal email
server and did not see a reason for encryption." He also told the FBI
about "failed log-in attempts" on the Clinton email server in
January 2011, which Pagliano described as a "brute force attack (BFA)"
that was not "abnormal." According to the LHM, "The FBI's review of
available Internet Information Services (IIS) web logs showed scanning
attempts from external IP addressees over the course of Pagliano's
administration of the server, though only one appeared to have
resulted in a successful compromise of an email account on the server."
As described in Section I of this chapter, the one confirmed successful
compromise was of an account belonging to one of President Clinton's
aides.

Both Department and FBI witnesses told us that no one opposed the
decision to grant Pagliano immunity. The SSA told us that the FBI did
not consider him a subject or someone they would prosecute in connection
with Midyear, the FBI believed his testimony was very important, and
providing immunity was an effective way to secure his testimony.
Prosecutor 4 told us that the way Pagliano was handled was "standard
operating procedure." In addition, witnesses told us that Pagliano
pleading the Fifth Amendment and refusing to testify before Congress
gave the Department no choice but to offer Pagliano immunity.

**B. Combetta**

As previously noted, Paul Combetta was the employee of PRN who migrated
the email accounts from the Pagliano server to the PRN server in 2013,
transferred Clinton's archived emails to the PRN server in 2014, and
later wiped emails from the PRN server in March of 2015. The Department
entered into a letter use immunity agreement with Combetta on May 3,
2016. Midyear team members told us that Combetta was an important
witness for several reasons, including his involvement with the culling
process and the deletion of emails and his interactions with several
people that worked for Clinton. Several Midyear team members stated that
after conducting two voluntary interviews of Combetta, they believed
that Combetta had not been forthcoming about, among other things, his
role in deleting emails from the PRN server following the issuance of a
Congressional preservation order. The witnesses further stated that
Combetta's truthful testimony was essential for assessing criminal
intent for Clinton and other individuals, because he would be able to
tell them whether Clinton's attorneys---Mills, Samuelson, or
Kendall---had instructed him to delete emails.

Combetta was first interviewed on September 17, 2015, by two case
agents, in the presence of Prosecutor 2 and Combetta's counsel. The
interview was voluntary and there was no immunity agreement. According
to the FD-302 and contemporaneous agent notes, Combetta provided
information regarding the set-up of the PRN server, the roles of other
PRN employees in the management of the PRN server, his role in
transferring emails from the Archive Laptop to the PRN server, and his
role in creating .pst files of Clinton's archived emails to be
transferred to the laptops used by Mills and Samuelson to cull Clinton's
emails ("culling laptops"). However, he denied that PRN "deleted or
purged" Clinton's emails from the PRN server or from back-ups of the
server and stated that Clinton's staff never requested that PRN do so.

On February 18, 2016, the same two agents interviewed Combetta again,
this time in the presence of the CART examiner, the Forensics Agent,
Prosecutor 2, and Combetta's counsel. Once again, the interview was
voluntary and there was no immunity agreement. According to the FD-302
and contemporaneous agent notes, Combetta continued to deny deleting the
HRC Archive Mailbox from the server and stated that "he believed the HRC
Archive mailbox should still be on the Server in the possession of the
FBI," despite documentation showing that the mailbox was no longer on
the server as of January 7, 2015. Combetta stated that only he and one
other administrator had the ability to delete a mailbox from the server.
When the agents showed him documentation indicating that an
administrator had manually deleted backup files and used BleachBit on
March 31, 2015, he stated that he did not recall deleting backup files,
he did not recall anyone asking him to delete backup files, any PRN
employee had the ability to delete backup files, he believed he used
BleachBit "for the removal of .pst files related to the various exports
of Clinton's email" to Mills's and Samuelson's laptops, and he used
BleachBit for this purpose "of his own accord based on his normal
practices as an engineer." He further stated that he did not recall a
March 9, 2015 email in which Mills reminded him of his obligation to
preserve emails pursuant to a preservation order. The FD302 and
contemporaneous notes indicate that the agents attempted to ask

Combetta about documents related to a conference call with Kendall and
Mills on March 25, 2015, just before the deletions and use of BleachBit,
but his attorney advised him not to answer based on the Fifth Amendment.

During the February 18, 2016 interview, the agents also showed Combetta
an email dated December 11, 2014, in which he wrote to a PRN colleague,
"I am stuck on the phone with CESC Clinton's staff again.. Its
sic all part of the Hilary sic coverup sic operation  I'll
have to tell you about it at the party." Combetta told the agents that
the reference to the "Hilary sic coverup sic operation" was
"probably due to the recently requested change to a 60 day email
retention policy and the comment was a joke."^[^80^](#fn80){#fnref80
.footnote-ref}^ Department and FBI witnesses told us that Combetta's
explanation for this email seemed credible to them, given his
personality and the way the email was written, and they did not discuss
interviewing Combetta's colleague regarding the email.

The SSA told us that he believed Combetta should have been charged with
false statements for lying multiple times; however, the SSA also stated
that he was ultimately satisfied that Combetta's later immunized
testimony was truthful and that he was "fine" with the immunity
agreement. Prosecutor 2, Agent 2, and the Forensics Agent indicated
that, while they believed that Combetta had not been forthcoming during
the first two interviews, they were not certain that they had sufficient
evidence to charge him with obstruction or false statements. According
to documents we reviewed, the forensic evidence showed that Clinton's
emails had been deleted and wiped from the server, but did not
definitively link Combetta with those actions. Agent 2 explained that
the team "felt pretty strongly that maybe he had deleted information off
of Secretary Clinton's server," but that interpreting computer forensics
and precisely what they mean can be "kind of messy." Similarly, the
Forensics Agent stated that, based on the forensic evidence alone, it
was "very difficult" to be certain that Combetta conducted the
deletions; however, based on the Midyear team's assessments of the
credibility of Combetta and the other administrator, the team was more
"focused on" Combetta. Prosecutor 2 told us that using the forensic
evidence in combination with witness testimony, the team "probably could
have established" that Combetta conducted the deletions; however,

Prosecutor 2 stated that there was insufficient evidence, after the
first two interviews, to prove that Combetta understood his obligation
to preserve Clinton's emails and deliberately violated the Congressional
preservation order.

In addition, members of the Midyear team told us, consistent with their
contemporaneous emails, that they believed Combetta's failure to be
forthcoming during the first two interviews was largely due to a lack of
sophistication and poor legal representation, rather than an intent to
hide truth. For example, Prosecutor 2 wrote in an email on March 29,
2016, to the other line prosecutors, "It's really hard to tell whether
Paul Combetta is trying to hide something, or we are simply
experiencing the effects of really bad (no) attorney prep and/or an
attorney that has counseled him to say 'I don't remember' if he doesn't
have a specific recollection of taking a specific action on a specific
date." Prosecutor 2 expressed the same sentiments during OIG interviews.
Agent 2 stated, "We just felt like we weren't getting the whole story or
maybe he was holding back a little." Prosecutor 1 stated, "We
didn\'t assess his exposure to be terribly significant." However,
Prosecutor 1 also stated:

There were certainly discussions about whether he had, had 18 U.S.C.
§ 1001 exposure for making false statements.. He was clearly
not being forthright with us.. And I think, my, my guess is if we
couldn\'t have gotten him to come in and, and he was messing around with
us on the immunity, we probably would have had to charge him. But, I
think we were more interested in understanding what had happened..
And the most expedient way to, to do that, I think we assessed, was just
to, to immunize him and keep moving.

Both prosecutors and agents also told us that Combetta was not someone
the government was interested in prosecuting given his role in the case.
Agent 1 told us that the absence of evidence that Combetta knew anything
about the content of the emails on Clinton's server minimized the FBI's
interest in prosecuting him. Prosecutor 4 stated:

I was concerned that we would end up with obstruction cases against some
poor schmuck on the down, that, that had a crappy attorney who didn't
really, you know, if I was his attorney, he wouldn't have gone in and
been, you know, hiding the ball in the first place. And so at the end of
the day, I was like, look, let's immunize him. We've got to get from
Point A to Point B. Point B is to make a prosecution decision about
Hillary Clinton and her senior staff well before the election if
possible. And this guy with his dumb attorney doing some half-assed
obstruction did not interest me. So I was totally in favor of giving him
immunity.

Prosecutor 2 told us that Combetta's counsel was "concerned" that the
Midyear team would "want to charge somebody.to show we had done
something" and "go after some low-level person like Combetta to make a
point." Prosecutor 2 stated, "that was never our intention" and "it was
in our interest to.make him and his counsel feel comfortable enough
that they were going to give us the facts that we needed to figure out
what happened in this case."

In the March 29, 2016 email exchange, the four line prosecutors weighed
two approaches to dealing with Combetta: (1) offering letter use
immunity and only issuing a grand jury subpoena if Combetta did not
comply or was untruthful during an immunized interview; versus (2)
issuing a grand jury subpoena first and withdrawing the subpoena if
Combetta was cooperative and truthful during a voluntary, immunized
interview the morning before a scheduled grand jury appearance. In
support of the second approach, Prosecutor 4 sent an email stating that
it was "common for witnesses to play games early in high profile
investigations as they try to figure out the lay of the land" and noting
that a grand jury subpoena was a "powerful" tool in this situation.

On April 8, 2016, the Department subpoenaed Combetta to appear before
the grand jury on May 3, 2016. Along with the subpoena, Prosecutor 3
wrote an email to Combetta's attorney that the FBI intended to "continue
its interview of Combetta and go over any relevant documents with
him" on May 3 and that "in the event he needs to appear before the
GJ, that would likely occur" the following morning. The prosecutors and
agents explained to us that the plan was to interview Combetta on May 3,
and place him in the grand jury on May 4 if they assessed that he was
still uncooperative or untruthful.

On the evening of May 2, Prosecutor 3 wrote to the other prosecutors
that that they would need to discuss whether to put Combetta in the
grand jury on May 4. He further wrote, "Regardless as to how he answers
the questions, I could see the FBI advocating that we put him in the
GJ." Prosecutor 4 responded, "I would prefer that we not put him in the
GJ without a clear articulable reason for doing so, but we can discuss."
Prosecutor 4 told the OIG:

Generally, I think people overestimate the value of the grand jury to
get people that are lying to tell the truth. My experience, I've had the
best luck with working with defense counsel or having very aggressive
interviews with them personally, one-on-one, which I would typically not
want to do in the grand jury. You know, if I'm going to beat somebody up
to get them to tell the truth, I don't want 23 grand jurors sitting
around while I'm yelling at somebody.

The prosecutors told us that Combetta's attorney had informed them in
advance of the May 3 meeting that Combetta would plead the Fifth
Amendment in the grand jury. They further told us they believed they had
no real choice but to grant Combetta immunity.^[^81^](#fn81){#fnref81
.footnote-ref}^ They stated that they did not consider charging Combetta
with a crime and then seeking his cooperation against other witnesses,
because they did not believe he had significant criminal exposure. In
addition, Prosecutor 1 explained that if the Department had dropped or
lowered charges against Combetta in exchange for his cooperation, a
defense attorney would have used the cooperation agreement to impeach
Combetta's credibility at a subsequent trial.

Accordingly, on May 3, 2016, the Department entered into a standard
letter use immunity agreement with Combetta. The terms of this agreement
were identical to the terms incorporated into the Pagliano letter use
immunity agreement. Specifically, in exchange for Combetta providing
truthful information during FBI interviews as well as truthful testimony
during any grand jury or court appearances, the Department agreed that
it would not use his statement or testimony, or any information derived
from it, during a subsequent criminal prosecution, "except for a
prosecution for perjury, giving a false statement, or any other offense
that may be prosecuted consistent with 18 U.S.C. §
6002."^[^82^](#fn82){#fnref82 .footnote-ref}^ Both the prosecutors and
the FBI agents involved with Combetta's interview told us that the
decision to grant Combetta use immunity was not controversial and that
everyone agreed that it was the most effective way to obtain the
information they needed from him.

During a speech at an FBI conference for Special Agents in Charge in
October 2016, Comey indicated that he agreed with the decision to enter
into a use immunity agreement with Combetta in order to obtain
potentially valuable information concerning any role that Clinton played
in the deletion of emails from her server. Responding to the complaint
that the Midyear team "handed out immunity like candy," he stated:

I hope you also notice our subject here was Hillary Clinton. We wanted
to see, this very aggressive investigative team wanted to see can we
make a case on Hillary Clinton. To make that case they worked up from
the bottom. The guy who set up her server, the guy who panicked and
deleted emails, he is really not our interest. Out interest is trying to
figure out did he give us anything against her.

Combetta was interviewed subject to the terms of the immunity agreement
on May 3, 2016, by the same two FBI case agents, this time in the
presence of the SSA, the CART examiner, all four line prosecutors, and
Combetta's attorneys.

According to the FD-302 and contemporaneous notes of the two agents and
the CART Examiner, Combetta provided the FBI additional detail regarding
his removal of emails from the culling laptops, stating that Mills had
requested that he "securely delete the .pst files" in November or
December 2014 but had not specifically requested that he use "deletion
software." He told the FBI that he was the one who recommended the use
of "BleachBit" because he had used it for other clients. He also
acknowledged removing the HRC Archive mailbox from the PRN server
between March 25, 2015, and March 31, 2015, and using BleachBit to
"shred" any remaining copies of Clinton's email on the server, despite
his awareness of Congress's preservation order and his understanding
that the order meant that "he should not disturb Clinton's email data on
the PRN server." According to the FD302 and contemporaneous notes,
Combetta told the FBI that he had an "oh shit" moment upon realizing
that he had failed to comply with Mills's request in late 2014 or early
2015 to "change the retention policy for Clinton's and Abedin's existing
and ongoing mail to 60 days." He further told the FBI that Mills had
contacted him on or about March 8, 2015, to assess what was still on the
servers, including whether there were any "old back up data or copies of
mailboxes hanging out there on old equipment." However, he stated that
he did not tell Mills that he subsequently realized the archived emails
were still on the PRN server or that he deleted them in late March. In
addition, he stated that he "could not recall the content" of the March
25, 2015, call with Kendall and Mills. In sum, Combetta took
responsibility for the deletions, without implicating Clinton or her
attorneys.

We interviewed seven Midyear team members who attended Combetta's May 3,
2016, interview, all of whom told us that they conferred immediately
following Combetta's interview and agreed that Combetta's testimony
finally "made sense," that he had been truthful and forthcoming, and
that he did not implicate anyone in criminal activity such that there
was a need to "lock in" his testimony in the grand jury. Prosecutor 1
told us that Combetta's testimony finally "squared with the forensic
evidence," and also corroborated the testimony of other witnesses,
including Mills and Samuelson, that they were unaware of the March
deletions by Combetta.

**C. Bentel**

As noted previously, John Bentel worked at the State Department for 39
years, the last four of which he served as Director of the Executive
Secretariat Information Resource Management (S/ES-IRM), before he
retired in 2012. As detailed below, the investigators had received
evidence that Bentel had information relating to the State Department's
possible sanctioning of Clinton's use of a private email server.

According to documentation we reviewed, the Department entered into a
"Queen for a Day" agreement with Bentel on June 10, 2016. The terms of
this agreement were similar to those offered to Pagliano. Prosecutor 2
told us that the team did not subsequently grant Bentel the broader
letter use immunity granted to Pagliano and Combetta, nor did his
counsel ask for it. The witnesses we interviewed told us that the
decision to enter into a Queen for a Day agreement with Bentel was not
controversial. Prosecutors 1 and 2 stated that Bentel's attorney sought
use immunity because he thought that Bentel was portrayed poorly in the
State IG report. They further stated that the team granted Bentel
immunity because he was a necessary witness, who did not, to their
knowledge, face any criminal "exposure." Prosecutor 2 described the
Bentel interview as a "check-thebox type interview." The SSA told us
that he did not oppose immunity for Bentel, because the FBI had no
intentions of seeking that Bentel be prosecuted.

The agents asked Bentel about allegations by two S/ES-IRM staff members
that they had raised concerns about Clinton's use of personal email to
him during separate meetings. According to the State IG report, one of
the staff members told the State IG that Bentel told the staff member
that "the mission of S/ES-IRM is to support the Secretary" and
instructed the staff member to "never speak of the Secretary's personal
email system again."^[^83^](#fn83){#fnref83 .footnote-ref}^ According to
the FD-302 and agent notes, the agents showed Bentel documents that
suggested that he was aware that Clinton had a private email server that
she used for official business during their joint tenure. One of the
agents explained that the purpose of asking Bentel about his knowledge
of the server was to assess whether Clinton's use of the server was
sanctioned by the State Department. However, Bentel maintained that he
was unaware that Clinton used personal email to conduct official
business until it was reported in the news and denied that anyone had
raised concerns about it to him.

Both agents who interviewed Bentel told us that he was uncooperative and
the interview was unproductive; however, they attributed these problems
to nervousness and fear of being found culpable. Agent 3 told us that he
did not believe that immunity for Bentel was necessary and that it did
not help the investigation because Bentel was not forthcoming during his
interview. However, he did not believe that Bentel had any criminal
exposure and therefore the immunity agreement did not harm the
investigation.

**VIII. Use of Consent and Act of Production Immunity to Obtain Mills
and Samuelson Testimony and Laptops**

In this section we examine decisions made by the FBI and the Department
regarding whether to interview Mills and Samuelson regarding the process
they used to cull Clinton's emails in connection with providing emails
to the State Department in 2014, as well as whether and how to obtain
and review the personal laptops used by Mills and Samuelson for this
culling process ("culling laptops"). The investigators told us that
access to these laptops was particularly important to ensure the
completeness of the investigation. All 62,320 emails pulled from the
Clinton servers were stored at one time on these laptops, so access to
the laptops offered the possibility of reconstructing a large number of
the deleted emails through digital forensics.^[^84^](#fn84){#fnref84
.footnote-ref}^ Moreover, the deletion of emails by Mills and Samuelson
from these laptops had become a matter of great public controversy,
including allegations that they had been deleted for improper purposes,
increasing the importance of attempting to recover as many of them as
possible. Ultimately, both Mills and Samuelson submitted to voluntary
interviews regarding the culling process and voluntarily provided the
culling laptops to the FBI after receiving "act of production" immunity.

In the subsections below we discuss: privilege claims raised by Mills
and Samuelson; the debate between the FBI and the Department; the events
that led to the Department securing voluntary interviews of Mills and
Samuelson; the steps that were taken to secure and search the culling
laptops, including the decision to grant Mills and Samuelson "act of
production" immunity and the consent agreements for the culling laptops;
the involvement of senior Department and FBI officials; and a discussion
of the motivations behind the Mills and Samuelson dispute.

**A. Privilege Claims Raised by Mills and Samuelson**

As noted previously, in response to a State Department request in 2014,
Mills and Samuelson, neither of whom were still employed by the State

Department, worked together on behalf of Clinton to produce Clinton's
State workrelated emails that were on the PRN server by crafting a
process to cull what they believed to be Clinton's personal emails from
her work-related emails. Samuelson, under Mills's supervision, reviewed
the emails that had been placed on the culling laptops and, following
completion of this culling process, Clinton produced 30,490 work-related
emails to the State Department. Thereafter, Mills and Samuelson asked
Combetta to securely delete the .pst files from the culling laptops,
which, as described above, he did using BleachBit. Mills and Samuelson
then continued to use the culling laptops for work related to their
legal representation of other clients.

While the Midyear team was interested in speaking with Mills and
Samuelson about this culling process, they also were interested in
interviewing Mills concerning her time at the State Department with
Clinton, due to evidence that Mills frequently communicated directly
with Clinton and that she received and forwarded classified information
on both her unclassified State email and personal Gmail
accounts.^[^85^](#fn85){#fnref85 .footnote-ref}^ During Clinton's tenure
as Secretary of State, Mills served as, among other things, Clinton's
Chief of Staff and Samuelson served as a senior advisor to Clinton and
White House Liaison.

According to documents we reviewed, Mills and Samuelson told the FBI and
Wilkinson told the prosecutors that Mills and Samuelson had
attorney-client relationships with Clinton for purposes of their work
culling Clinton's emails in 2014.

According to internal memoranda and emails, the prosecutors began asking
Wilkinson to provide her clients for voluntary interviews regarding the
culling process in December 2015, but Wilkinson raised objections.
Specifically, Wilkinson argued that any interview questions regarding
the culling process "would require answers revealing privileged
information," and she suggested that the Department obtain the
information through an attorney proffer by Wilkinson
instead.^[^86^](#fn86){#fnref86 .footnote-ref}[^87^](#fn87){#fnref87
.footnote-ref}^ Prosecutor 2 told us, and contemporaneous notes show,
that the prosecutors also asked Wilkinson to voluntarily turn over the
culling laptops in March 2016, after Wilkinson informed them that the
laptops were still in her clients' possession. However, Wilkinson
refused to voluntarily turn over the culling laptops, arguing that the
laptops contained privileged information related to both Clinton and
Mills's and Samuelson's other clients. Wilkinson told the prosecutors
that she would instead take possession of the culling laptops from her
clients, disconnect them from the Internet, and secure them in a safe in
her office.

**B. Debate over Interviewing Mills and Samuelson Regarding the Culling
Process and Obtaining the Culling Laptops**

FBI case agents and the SSA told us, and contemporaneous emails show,
that they believed that interviewing Mills and Samuelson regarding the
culling process and searching the culling laptops were essential
investigative steps. They stated that they hoped to be able to find the
full 62,320 emails that were originally reviewed by Mills and Samuelson
to determine whether any additional emails--- beyond those that
Clinton's attorneys provided to the State Department and those that the
FBI found through other sources---contained classified information. They
further stated that they believed the culling process might have been
flawed, because their other reconstruction efforts had revealed a
significant number of work related emails to or from Clinton that had
not been included in the State

Department production. Strzok told us that the FBI investigators hoped
that asking questions about the culling process and reviewing the
culling laptops would help determine why this was the case and whether
there was a nefarious purpose. For example, several FBI witnesses stated
that they believed that asking questions about the culling process might
help them determine why Abedin's emails were underrepresented in the
State IG production.

FBI witnesses told us that once Wilkinson refused to voluntarily provide
her clients for interviews and the culling laptops, they believed it was
appropriate and in the interest of efficiency to subpoena Mills and
Samuelson before the grand jury and seek a search warrant to seize the
culling laptops from Wilkinson's office. The FBI witnesses stated that
even if a judge ultimately were to quash a subpoena or decide that there
was no probable cause to issue a search warrant, it was the FBI's
obligation to at least try to obtain what they believed to be critical
potential sources of evidence.

The line prosecutors and Laufman told us, and contemporaneous emails and
internal memoranda show, that they agreed that it would be helpful to
interview Mills and Samuelson regarding the culling process and obtain
the culling laptops. However, they had several concerns about using
compulsory process to do so. First, they were concerned that at least
certain questions regarding the culling process would seek information
protected by attorney-client privilege and the attorney work product
doctrine. Second, they were concerned that the culling laptops contained
privileged material relating to both Clinton and Mills's and Samuelson's
other clients. Third, they raised questions about establishing probable
cause to search the culling laptops given evidence that they had been
wiped of the emails relevant to the Midyear investigation. Fourth, based
on conversations with Wilkinson, they believed she would file a motion
to quash any search warrant or subpoena and that this would lead to
protracted litigation that would delay the investigation. Finally, they
stated that they were required to follow the procedures set forth in the
Department policy for obtaining physical evidence and testimony from an
attorney regarding the attorney's representation of a client. They
stated that, at a minimum, 28 C.F.R. § 59.4 and USAM 9-19.220 and
9-13.420 did not permit them to execute a search warrant on Wilkinson's
office under these circumstances.

The prosecutors told the OIG that the FBI did not appreciate the
complexity involved with obtaining the culling testimony and laptops.
Prosecutor 4, whom several witnesses told us was known for being an
experienced prosecutor with significant experience handling privilege
issues, explained that he was frustrated that the FBI was "willing to
litigate to the death issues that he thought would be very close
calls and could delay the investigation for two years without a strong
belief that it would actually change the results" of the investigation.

**C. Events Leading to Voluntary Interviews of Mills and Samuelson
Regarding the Culling Process**

**1. Attorney Proffer on March 19, 2016**

On February 1, 2016, Toscas received from the NSD prosecutors their
proposed investigative steps for Mills and Samuelson. The prosecutors
proposed pursuing a grand jury subpoena to question Mills concerning her
State Department tenure (where there were no attorney-client privilege
issues), but seeking attorney proffers before considering grand jury
subpoenas for Mills's and Samuelson's testimony about the culling
process. They provided two reasons for this approach.

First, they indicated that, pursuant to the USAM, to obtain Criminal
Division authorization for a subpoena to an attorney regarding the
attorney's representation of a client they must show that the
information sought is not protected by a valid claim of privilege and
that "all reasonable attempts to obtain the information from
alternative sources shall have proved to be unsuccessful." USAM
9-13.410(C). The prosecutors described how they would tailor their
questions about the culling process to avoid seeking information
protected by attorney client privilege.^[^88^](#fn88){#fnref88
.footnote-ref}^ However, they indicated that they could not represent
that all reasonable attempts had been made to obtain the information
from alternative sources without first attempting to obtain the
information through an attorney proffer.

Second, they indicated that they were concerned that issuing subpoenas
for testimony regarding the culling process could result in protracted
litigation with an uncertain outcome. They indicated that, despite
extensive legal research, the team had been unable to find clear
authority indicating that a court should allow an attorney to be
questioned about actions taken on behalf of a client, even if describing
those actions would not implicate confidential communications between
the client and attorney.

In February 2016, Wilkinson agreed to both an attorney proffer by
Wilkinson regarding the culling process and a voluntary interview of
Mills regarding her State Department tenure. On February 8, 2016, the
prosecutors emailed Wilkinson a short list of broad topics for the
attorney proffer and the proffer was scheduled for March 19, 2016.
Separately, Mills's interview regarding her State Department tenure was
set for April 9, 2016.

According to Prosecutor 2's notes of the March 19 attorney proffer, the
proffer was attended by all four line prosecutors, Beth Wilkinson, and
two other attorneys from Wilkinson's firm. Mills's and Samuelson's
attorneys told the prosecutors, consistent with a State IG Report
described above, that Mills and Samuelson initiated the culling process
after the State Department requested

Clinton's assistance reconstructing her work-related emails. The
attorneys further stated that the State Department had told Mills that
"it was HRC's responsibility to determine" what was personal and what
was work-related, because this would be "too burdensome for State." The
attorneys described the manner in which Mills and Samuelson obtained the
emails from Combetta and generally how they conducted their review. The
attorneys told the prosecutors that Mills asked Combetta to remove the
.pst files from Mills's and Samuelson's laptops after Clinton's
workrelated emails were produced to the State Department; however, the
attorneys stated that they "never heard of BleachBit." According to the
notes, the attorneys confirmed that Clinton had changed her email
retention policy to 60 days in early 2015, but would not "say reason for
changing policy -- either privilege or HRC's question to answer."

**2. Midyear Team Meeting on March 28, 2016**

After the March 19 attorney proffer, the FBI team took the position that
it was still essential to interview Mills and Samuelson regarding the
culling process. On March 28, 2016, the Midyear team held a meeting to
decide the best way forward. McCabe and Toscas were the highest level
FBI and Department officials, respectively, at the meeting. Witnesses
told the OIG and contemporaneous emails show that this meeting was
contentious and that the FBI insisted that the team either interview
Mills regarding the culling process during the scheduled interview on
April 9, 2016, or inform Wilkinson before April 9 of its intent to do so
at a future date. The FBI witnesses stated that they believed if they
did not do this, Mills would only give the FBI one "bite at the
apple"---that she would assert publicly that she cooperated with the FBI
without an incentive to return for another interview.

Based on a review of emails and text message exchanges, we determined
that Page was one of the more outspoken FBI personnel at the March 28
meeting in favor of interviewing Mills and Samuelson about the culling
process and countering the Department's privilege concerns. In a March
29, 2016 email exchange, Strzok asked Prosecutor 4, "How are you
doing? You seemed none too pleased at times on Monday March 28."
Prosecutor 4 replied with an email about Page:

I am fine. I don't like "former prosecutors" Page giving their
opinions from the cheap seats. I have been known throughout my career by
the agents I work with as the most aggressive prosecutor that they have
ever seen. During my last five jury trials I have forced no fewer than a
dozen lawyers to testify against their former clients. It is easy for
FBI attorneys to second guess our opinions when they haven't ever had to
actually stand before a judge and defend their
opinion.^[^89^](#fn89){#fnref89 .footnote-ref}^

In response, Strzok defended Page and wrote, "Best I can tell is I think
everyone in the room's motives were (are) pure." Prosecutor 4 then
wrote:

I am stuck in the middle of pushing NSD along and trying to get FBI to
be realistic. The investigation is degenerating into everyone trying to
figure out what the congressional testimony looks like in the future. My
job is to put criminals in jail, period.

Following the March 28 meeting, Strzok drafted an email to send to the
prosecutors to memorialize the FBI's understanding of the decision made
at the meeting regarding Mills and Samuelson. The email was approved by
FBI OGC, Steinbach, and McCabe. Strzok sent the email on March 29, 2016,
to the four line prosecutors and copied Toscas and several FBI
employees. In the email, Strzok wrote that the prosecutors had agreed to
"inform Wilkinson of DOJ's and FBI's intention to interview Mills and
Samuelson about the sort process." In addition, Strzok wrote that the
prosecutors had agreed to contact the Department's Professional
Responsibility Advisory Office (PRAO) regarding whether they could seek
a waiver of attorney-client privilege from Clinton through Kendall.

According to emails we reviewed, the line prosecutors and Laufman agreed
with reaching out to PRAO for advice on seeking a waiver from Kendall
and did so on March 31, 2016. In addition, in early April, 2016, they
sought guidance from the Criminal Division as to whether seeking the
waiver was permissible under Department policy. On April 12, 2016, three
days after the Mills interview, a Criminal Division official told NSD
that he was "not aware of any DOJ policy that would prevent CES from
seeking the waiver."

As far as Strzok's assertion that the prosecutors had agreed to notify
Wilkinson that the FBI intended to interview her clients regarding the
culling process, Prosecutors 1 and 2 indicated in an email exchange on
March 30, 2016, that this was not correct. According to the March 30
email exchange, the prosecutors were concerned that certain issues had
not yet been resolved, including obtaining necessary approvals from the
Criminal Division. Also on March 30, 2016, Prosecutor 1 wrote to
Prosecutor 2 and Laufman that he did not want to take a position with
Wilkinson that they would be unable to "stand behind" and thus be
accused of "dealing with her in bad faith." Prosecutor 1 told us, "It's
not smart to make demands when you don't understand what kind of
leverage you have." Thus, Prosecutor 2 told us, and documents showed,
that before the April 9 interview the prosecutors told Wilkinson that
the FBI "had not foreclosed" the possibility of interviewing her clients
regarding the culling process, but not that the FBI insisted on doing
so.

3.  **FBI Call to Wilkinson on April 8 About Mills and Samuelson
    Interviews Without Informing Prosecutors**

On April 8, 2016, the day before the Mills interview, FBI GC Baker
contacted Wilkinson, without notifying the line prosecutors or higher
Department officials in advance, to convince her to consent to the FBI's
demands for the culling testimony and culling
laptops.^[^90^](#fn90){#fnref90 .footnote-ref}^ The prosecutors learned
of Baker's call to Wilkinson the following day, when Wilkinson told the
prosecutors at the Mills interview she had been contacted by a "senior
FBI official" regarding interviews of her clients.

Comey told us that he approved Baker's call to Wilkinson and that he
"must have known Baker was not going to tell DOJ." In addition,
Laufman's notes of a meeting following the Mills interview indicate that
McCabe was aware of the call beforehand. Baker told us that he reached
out to Wilkinson because he believed the line prosecutors had not been
sufficiently aggressive. Laufman stated that he took "great offense" to
Baker's assertion that the prosecutors had not been aggressive with
Wilkinson, "because we were accomplishing and had accomplished great
things through creative troubleshooting of extraordinarily sensitive
issues with counsel to obtain the media and devices whose review was the
foundation of this investigation." Prosecutors 1 and 2 told us that
Baker's efforts were not effective, because Wilkinson continued to
refuse to provide consent.

3.  **FBI Surprise Statement at Outset of April 9 Mills Interview**

On April 9, 2016, Mills appeared with Wilkinson for a voluntary
interview concerning Mills's tenure at State. According to a FBI
memorandum ("Mills Interview Memorandum"), shortly before the interview
Strzok advised the prosecutors and Laufman that the agent conducting the
interview would be making a statement at the start of the interview
"concerning the scope of the interview, the FBI's view of the
importance of the email sorting process, and the expectation of a
follow-up interview once legal issues had been resolved." Witnesses
referred to this statement as "the preamble."

Comey told the OIG that he approved of the preamble but did not suggest
it, and McCabe stated that he "authorized" the preamble. McCabe told us
that he directed the FBI team not to discuss the preamble with the
prosecutors before the day of the interview because he was "concerned
that if we raised another issue with DOJ, we would spend another two
weeks arguing over the drafting of the preamble to the interview, which
I just was not prepared to do."

The prosecutors told us that they were surprised and upset because the
preamble was inconsistent with their prior representations to Wilkinson
and they believed it was strategically ill-advised. The Mills Interview
Memorandum states that the prosecutors objected to the preamble but that
they were told that "the

FBI's position was not subject to further discussion."

According to the Mills Interview Memorandum, the interviewing agents
delivered the preamble at the outset of the interview as planned.
Witnesses told us that Wilkinson was visibly angered by the preamble and
that she and Mills stepped outside the interview room after the agent
delivered it. The prosecutors stated that they convinced Wilkinson and
Mills to return for the remainder of the scheduled interview concerning
Mills's tenure. However, according to Prosecutor 1, Mills was

"on edge the whole time."^[^91^](#fn91){#fnref91 .footnote-ref}^

According to notes of the interview, the prosecutors told Wilkinson that
they were "sandbagged" by the FBI and that they did not know in advance
about the preamble. Additionally, according to the notes, Wilkinson
informed the prosecutors of the call the previous day from a "senior FBI
official."

Prosecutors and FBI agents told us that the events surrounding the April
9 Mills interview, including both the preamble and Baker phone call that
were planned without Department coordination, caused significant strife
and mistrust between the line prosecutors and the FBI. AAG Carlin told
us that the prosecution team asked him to call McCabe and "deliver a
message that this is just not an acceptable way to run an
investigation." Carlin told us that he delivered this message to McCabe
and also briefed Lynch and Yates on the issues.

Witnesses told us that the strife between the prosecutors and the FBI
team culminated in a contentious meeting chaired by McCabe a few days
later. On the Department side, this meeting was attended by the line
prosecutors, Laufman, and Toscas. Prosecutor 2 told us that during this
meeting the prosecutors explained that they were trying to be "careful"
in their handling of complicated issues, and that McCabe responded that
they should "be careful faster." Laufman stated that McCabe's comment
"undervalued what we had been able to accomplish to date investigatively
through negotiating consent agreements." According to Laufman's notes,
McCabe agreed that Baker's unilateral contacts with Wilkinson should not
have happened, and Baker agreed not to have further contact with
Wilkinson. With respect to the preamble, however, the prosecutors told
us that McCabe stated that he would "do it again."

**5. Mills and Samuelson Agree to Voluntary Interviews Regarding the
Culling Process**

In May 2016, Wilkinson agreed to allow Mills and Samuelson to be
voluntarily interviewed regarding the culling process, provided the
questions asked during the interviews did not seek information that was
considered "opinion work product."^[^92^](#fn92){#fnref92
.footnote-ref}^ The prosecutors told us that this meant that the agents
could ask questions regarding the "mechanics" of the culling process,
including how Mills and

Samuelson obtained and reviewed the emails for production to the State
Department. However, they told us that they could not put a particular
email in front of Mills or Samuelson and ask why the call was made to
consider it workrelated or personal. The prosecutors explained that,
based upon their research and Prosecutor 4's experience with privilege,
they believed they would not likely be successful convincing a judge
that such questions were permissible.

Samuelson and Mills were interviewed regarding the culling process on
May 24, 2016, and May 28, 2016, respectively, which was before the
Midyear team obtained access to the culling laptops. Witnesses told us
and contemporaneous documents show that the agents prepared outlines in
advance of the interviews and the prosecutors reviewed them to ensure
they were consistent with the agreed upon parameters. For example, based
on witness testimony and the outline we reviewed, the prosecutors
eliminated a question that asked for the "exact" search terms that were
used during the culling process. Prosecutor 2 told us that during

the attorney-client privilege, is generally protected from discovery.
Strzok told us that the Midyear team considered whether questions
regarding how Mills and Samuelson made decisions to exclude particular
emails could have been asked based on the "crime-fraud" exception to the
attorney-work product doctrine. In the Fourth Circuit (which includes
EDVA), in order to invoke the crime-fraud exception, the government
"must make a prima facie showing that (1) the client was engaged in or
planning a criminal or fraudulent scheme when he sought the advice of
counsel to further the scheme, and (2) the documents containing the
privileged materials bear a close relationship to the client\'s existing
or future scheme to commit a crime or fraud." In order to apply the
crime-fraud exception to an attorney's opinion work product, the
government must also "make a prima facie showing that the attorney in
question was aware of or a knowing participant in the criminal conduct."
*In re Grand Jury Proceedings No. 5,* 401 F.3d 247, 251-52 (4th Cir.
2005).

While we did not ask the prosecutors about the crime-fraud exception
directly, it appeared, based on their answers to other questions, that
that they did not believe that they could show that Mills or Samuelson
were "engaged in or planning a criminal or fraudulent scheme" when they
culled Clinton's emails for production to the State IG. Prosecutor 2
stated that the Midyear team had not uncovered evidence during the
course of the investigation that Mills or Samuelson had a criminal
"motive" when they conducted the culling process. Prosecutor 2
explained, "There was nothing that was different in the type of
emails that were produced and the types of emails that were found
elsewhere to indicate to us that there was any sort of.nefarious
intent." Similarly, Prosecutor 1 stated that the notion that Mills or
Samuelson had criminal mens rea when they conducted the sort process was
contradicted by the fact that the production to the State Department
contained numerous classified emails. This prosecutor stated, "Lots
of classified stuff got turned over in FOIA, so the notion that they
would have been deleting the classified didn\'t make a lot of sense to
us at this point in the investigation, because they probably would
have done a better job of getting rid of it." The Lead Analyst told us
that "he had no evidence to suggest that" there was "some sort of
willful arrangement to.remove and otherwise sideline material that
would, you know, reflect criminal activity." He further stated, "We
didn't see anything else to suggest that there are these like
willful criminal arrangements with attorneys."

Prosecutor 2 told us, and contemporaneous documents show, that the
Midyear team also considered whether there was a waiver of privilege,
due to either (1) the publication of certain information regarding the
culling process on the Clinton campaign website; or (2) Mills's
testimony about aspects of the culling process before the House Benghazi
Committee. Prosecutor 2 stated, "We thought we had pretty good
arguments to argue waiver on fact work product but not opinion work
product, which is kind of like.the way I differentiate it, asking
about the mechanics versus asking about why substantive decisions were
made."

the interviews "there were a couple of assertions of privilege," but
overall the interviews went well.

One of the case agents who led Mills's and Samuelson's interviews told
us that he believed the interviews regarding the culling process were
not as productive as he would have liked, because Mills and Samuelson
were "so well-rehearsed." He attributed this to a number of factors,
including that they were interviewed late in the investigation,
Wilkinson was aware of the scope of the interview in advance from
discussions with the prosecutors, and Mills was a "highly-trained
professional" with an "excellent" attorney. He further stated that the
limited scope of the questioning "took away some of our tools that we
would have had going into that interview." Other FBI witnesses, however,
told us that while there was some debate over the scope of the
interviews beforehand, the team was ultimately satisfied with the
information that was obtained. Prosecutor 2 told us that "nobody ever
expressed a concern following the interviews that there was something
that we needed that we didn't get."

**D. Steps Taken to Obtain and Search the Culling Laptops**

As noted above, the investigators wanted access to the laptops primarily
because such access promised the possibility of reconstructing the
emails that had been deleted in the culling process. However, because
Mills and Samuelson were both attorneys, the issue of obtaining access
to the laptops implicated questions regarding how to protect any
privileged information residing on them.

**1. Internal Strategizing and Call with Clinton's Counsel**

Documents we reviewed reflected that the prosecutors spent significant
time and effort conducting research, analyzing relevant legal, policy,
and ethical issues, and strategizing how to best handle the issue of the
culling laptops.

Contemporaneous emails and text message exchanges we reviewed show that
Strzok and Page challenged the prosecutors' laptop privilege concerns
and were two of the most outspoken proponents of using compulsory
process to obtain the culling laptops. Page explained to the OIG why she
did not agree that the emails on the laptops were privileged:

These are materials, these are the State Department's records. And if
the Secretary in the first place had actually followed normal protocol,
every single one of these emails, whether personal or work-related would
have been in the State Department's possession, and there would be no
attorney-client discussions happening with respect to the sort of this
material.

In addition, Page stated that any other privileged material on the
laptops could be handled by the Midyear team's already established
filter team.

On May 18, 2016, Toscas, McCabe, Page, and Prosecutor 1 had a telephone
conference with DAAG Paul O'Brien of the Department's Criminal Division
regarding the likelihood of Department approval for search warrants or
subpoenas to obtain the culling laptops. O'Brien told the OIG, and
Page's and Toscas's contemporaneous notes show, that during this call
McCabe advocated in favor of a search warrant, but O'Brien stated that a
search warrant was "a nonstarter."

O'Brien stated that he explained to McCabe that a search warrant for
Beth Wilkinson's office was inconsistent with the USAM and 28 C.F.R. §
59.1. He further stated that he told McCabe that a judge was likely to
question why the government was seeking a search warrant to seize the
laptops from Wilkinson's office, when a subpoena would suffice to obtain
them (and a search warrant could be sought later to review their
contents).^[^93^](#fn93){#fnref93 .footnote-ref}[^94^](#fn94){#fnref94
.footnote-ref}^ O'Brien told the OIG that even with a filter team, "any
time you issue a search warrant for an attorney's office, you run the
potential and the possibility that you can be inadvertently coming
across protected client, sensitive attorney-client information." He
further told us that he believed a subpoena was more appropriate,
because it would be less intrusive and "there was no thought that Beth
Wilkinson was going to destroy the evidence." According to Page's notes,
O'Brien stated on the call that he had never seen the Department seek a
search warrant in similar circumstances.^[^95^](#fn95){#fnref95
.footnote-ref}^

On May 23, 2016, Toscas, McCabe, Page, and Prosecutor 1 spoke with
Kendall based on the approval previously received from the Criminal
Division. During the call, they described to Kendall the difficulty the
team was having obtaining the culling laptops and told him that they
would not interview Clinton before obtaining the laptops. Prosecutor 1
stated that the team assumed Kendall and Wilkinson were speaking with
one another and that a conversation with Kendall might ultimately lead
to Wilkinson voluntarily providing the laptops.

**2. Approval to Subpoena the Culling Laptops**

On May 31, 2016, after hearing nothing further from Kendall, the Midyear
team submitted applications for the approval of subpoenas for the
culling laptops to the Criminal Division through O'Brien. The
applications were signed by EDVA U.S. Attorney Boente. The team also
prepared and submitted to O'Brien search warrant applications for
reviewing the content of the culling laptops, to submit to a court once
the laptops were obtained.

In a letter to Toscas dated June 3, 2016, O'Brien authorized the
issuance of the proposed subpoenas. He further wrote that the team "had
satisfied the requirement, pursuant to USAM 9-13.420(C), to consult the
Criminal Division before applying for a warrant to search the laptop
computers."^[^96^](#fn96){#fnref96 .footnote-ref}^ Toscas told us, and
contemporaneous emails show, that he proposed applying to the court for
an "anticipatory search warrant." An anticipatory search warrant is one
that is approved by the court for use once a triggering event occurs, in
this case the FBI securing the laptops by subpoena. Toscas stated that
he was in favor of the anticipatory search warrant because he thought it
might help persuade a judge to side with the government when litigating
a possible later motion to quash the subpoena. However, he said that
Boente and the prosecutors in EDVA did not agree because anticipatory
search warrants were not typically used in that fashion in their
jurisdiction.

On June 4, 2016, Prosecutor 1 wrote to Wilkinson:

I had wanted to speak to you personally today to discuss next steps.
Since we were unable to connect, in the interest of time, I am advising
you that DOJ has authorized subpoenas for both laptops, which we intend
to serve by COB Monday. It is important that we speak on the phone as
soon as possible tomorrow.

The prosecutors had a series of phone calls with Wilkinson over the next
two days, ultimately resulting in four letters dated June 10, 2016: two
from the Department

(one for Mills and one for Samuelson) granting Wilkinson's clients "act
of production" immunity in exchange for voluntarily providing the
culling laptops and two from Wilkinson (one for Mills and one for
Samuelson) granting the Department consent to review the culling
laptops, with certain restrictions. Witnesses told us that McCabe and
Toscas were the highest level FBI and Department officials,
respectively, to approve these agreements.

**3. Act of Production Immunity for Mills and Samuelson**

The Department entered into "act of production" immunity agreements with
both Mills and Samuelson on June 10, 2016. The immunity agreements
provided that the government would "not.use any information directly
obtained from" the culling laptops in any prosecution of either witness
"for the mishandling of classified information and/or the removal or
destruction of records," pursuant to "18 U.S.C. § 793(e) and/or (f); 18
U.S.C. § 1924; and/or 18 U.S.C. § 2071." Therefore, Prosecutors 1 and 2
told us it was their view that the government would have been free to
use in any future prosecution of Mills and Samuelson leads developed as
a result of the FBI's review of the information on the culling laptops,
as well as information provided by Mills and Samuelson during their
voluntary interviews.

FBI and Department witnesses told us that no one within the team
disagreed with the decision to enter into these immunity agreement with
Mills and Samuelson in exchange for obtaining the culling laptops. We
also were told by FBI and Department witnesses that, based on the
evidence they had gathered at that point in the investigation, they did
not expect to uncover anything on the culling laptops that would be
incriminating to Mills or Samuelson. The prosecutors told us that that
Mills and Samuelson had included in the State Department production
numerous emails containing classified information, including emails
containing SAP information which was the most sensitive material
identified during the Midyear investigation. They also had included the
emails with the (C) portion markings, which were the only emails
containing classification markings that were discovered during the
investigation. According to Prosecutor 2, "There was nothing that
was different in the type of emails that were produced and the types of
emails that were found elsewhere to indicate to us that there was any
sort of motive" or "nefarious intent."

In addition, Prosecutor 1 stated that, even after the prosecutors had
approval to obtain the laptops by subpoena, they believed that obtaining
them through consent was preferable, because they expected a motion to
quash and time lost through subsequent litigation. Similarly, FBI agents
and supervisors told us that they did not object to the immunity
agreements because the protection offered by them was limited and
allowed the team to obtain needed sources of potential evidence without
inhibiting the investigation.

Comey explained in a speech at an FBI conference for Special Agents in
Charge in October 2016 that there were "huge concerns" about
attorney-client privilege and attorney work product on the culling
laptops that warranted entering into the immunity agreements with Mills
and Samuelson in order to secure them. He stated:

You can also imagine given that you're experienced people the challenge
in trying to get a lawyer to give you their laptop that you use for all
of their legal work. Huge concerns there about attorneyclient privilege,
attorney work product. We had a few options there. One was to serve them
with a Grand Jury subpoena and then litigate the work product protection
and the attorney-client protections for probably the next five years, or
reach some agreement with them to voluntarily produce it and give them
some sort of assurance as to how the information will be used on that
laptop.. Department of Justice reached an agreement at the request of
the lawyer for these two lawyers that for act of production of immunity
is the way I understand it in my career that is you give this laptop, we
will not use anything on the laptop against you personally in a
prosecution for mishandling of classified information or anything else
related to classified information. Reasonable to ask for a lawyer to ask
to give us the laptops and enabled us to short circuit the months and
months of litigation that would\'ve come otherwise. I was actually
surprised they agreed to give us the laptops.

**4. Limitations in the Consents to Search the Culling Laptops**

In addition to the immunity agreements, which the Department entered
into to obtain possession of the culling laptops, the Department entered
into consent agreements with both Mills and Samuelson in order to enable
the FBI to search the laptops with certain limitations. The consent
agreements provided that the "sole purposes of the search" were:

"To search for any .pst files, or .ost files, or compressed files
containing .pst or .ost files, that were created by Platte River
Networks (\"PRN\") after June 1, 2014 and before February 1, 2015, in
response to requests for former Secretary Clinton's email from her
tenure as Secretary of State;"

"To attempt to identify any emails from, or remnants of, the PRN
Files that could potentially be present on the Device;"

"To identify any emails resident on the Device sent to or received
from" Hillary Clinton's known email accounts, "for the period of January
21, 2009 through February 1, 2013;" and

"To conduct a forensic analysis of the device to determine whether
the Device was subject to intrusions or otherwise compromised."

The consent agreements described in detail a two-phase process the FBI
would use to search the devices for the listed purposes. In the first
phase, OTD would search the allocated space of the devices for the .pst
files created by Combetta. If the intact .pst files were found, OTD
would not move on to the second phase. If not, OTD would go on to the
second phase, which would entail searching both the allocated and
unallocated space for "any emails, fragments of emails, files, or
fragments of files" that could "clearly be identified as having been
sent to or received by" one of Clinton's email accounts during her
tenure.^[^97^](#fn97){#fnref97 .footnote-ref}^

Witnesses told us, and contemporaneous text and instant message
exchanges among FBI employees show, that negotiating the consent
agreements was a difficult process and, at least at the outset, Strzok
and others at the FBI believed that the prosecutors were giving
Wilkinson too much control.^[^98^](#fn98){#fnref98 .footnote-ref}^
However, when we interviewed Strzok, he told us that he no longer could
remember what his specific concerns were at the time and, in the end,
"we got what we needed to credibly come to the resolution that we did in
the investigation." He further stated that some of the sentiments he
expressed over text message to Page about the prosecutors' handling of
the issue reflected only the heat of the moment and his opinions at the
time.

Agent 1 told us that the phases outlined in the consent agreements were
overly complicated and that he did not agree that the FBI should not
have been able to review the unallocated space if the analysts found the
.pst files in phase 1. Contemporaneous instant messages show that the
Lead Analyst, FBI Attorney 1, and FBI Attorney 2 shared this concern.
However, this concern became moot when OTD was unable to find the .pst
files in phase 1 and ultimately went on to phase 2 and searched the
unallocated space.

FBI Attorney 1 exchanged instant messages with the Lead Analyst and FBI
Attorney 2 in which she expressed frustration during the drafting of the
consent agreements. For example, on June 8, 2016, she wrote to the Lead
Analyst, "The fact that Pete Strzok met with Prosecutor 1 and
hashed all this out and capitulated really pisses me off." Also on June
8, 2016, she wrote to FBI Attorney 2, "OMG. I'm so defeated. Why do I
bother?" FBI Attorney 1 told us, in an interview before viewing these
instant messages, that she had concerns with the filter process set
forth in the consent agreements, which limited the filter team to "two
attorneys, one FBI agent, and one FBI analyst, none of whom are members
of the investigative team." The agreements stated that OTD would provide
the emails from its search to the filter team, which would then "review
those results to identify and remove: (1) any privileged material; (2)
any material that, upon further review, is determined not to be an
e-mail sent to, or received by, the Relevant Accounts during the
Relevant Period; and (3) any material that, upon further review, is
determined not to be a work-related e-mail sent to, or received by,"
Clinton's relevant email account. FBI Attorney 1 stated that she opposed
this language because it differed from the filter process that had been
used for other devices, wherein the filter team, with the assistance of
OTD, relied more heavily on search terms to eliminate material that was
beyond the scope of review or privileged. She stated that her concern
was that the filter process would be too time-consuming. However, she
told us that in the end the filter team was able to "get it done in a
timely manner" and that resolved her concerns.

In a follow up interview after viewing the instant messages, FBI
Attorney 1 told us that the June 8, 2016 instant messages were exchanged
during a lengthy telephone conference with Prosecutors 1 and 2, Strzok,
the Lead Analyst, FBI Attorney 2, and OTD technicians. She stated that
the frustrations expressed in her instant messages related to her
concerns about the filter process discussed during her first interview.
She further stated that her complaints about Strzok had to do with him
not including her in certain conversations with the prosecutors.
However, she told us that she did not believe that Strzok was failing to
represent the FBI's interests in those conversations. She also
reiterated that she was ultimately satisfied with the terms of the
consent agreements. On June 28, 2016, FBI Attorney 1 sent an instant
message to the lead filter team attorney offering to provide the filter
team with additional resources to review the culling laptops. The filter
attorney responded, "Just got data from OTD and we seem to be in a good
place with our current filter resources."

Agent 3 told us he was concerned by the requirement in Phase 2 that the
emails be "clearly identifiable" as having been sent to or from one of
Clinton's email accounts during her tenure, because sometimes the
metadata in the unallocated space was unclear. However, he told us that
he did not express this concern to the prosecutors at the time the
consent agreements were being negotiated and that he was not sure that
he had sufficient "technical basis" to do so. We asked Prosecutors 1 and
2 about this concern and they stated that the language was developed
with input from the investigative team and OTD to ensure that they were
able to access what they needed to access in order to adequately review
the laptops. Prosecutor 2 stated, "We came to the conclusion that the
procedures that were in this letter would allow us to look at the
material that we thought was critical to look at, and yet protect the
attorney-client privilege in a way we thought we were required to do."

Other FBI employees told us that they would have preferred to be able to
search for emails sent or received just before or after Clinton's
tenure, in the hope of identifying Clinton's intent in setting up the
email server or the intent behind the later deletions of emails. The
Lead Analyst told us that he would have liked to have been able to
search Mills's and Samuelson's own emails on the culling laptops, to
determine what instructions were provided to Samuelson regarding how to
conduct the culling process and to see if there was any evidence
regarding why later deletions occurred. He stated that this information
would have helped the FBI determine whether Mills and Samuelson
"willfully" did something "illegal or inappropriate" during the sort
process or whether there were "serious flaws" in the process. However,
he stated he had "no evidence to suggest" that Clinton or her attorneys
had a criminal purpose in the way they conducted the sort process or in
the deletion of emails. He further stated, "We didn't see anything
anywhere else to suggest that there is these like willful criminal
arrangements with attorneys. Like, there's nothing to suggest that
that's the case. It's just, you know, it's the curious part of the
investigator in all of us that thinks about that."

The prosecutors and some of the agents told us that the consent
agreements were date restricted, because the primary purpose of
reviewing the culling laptops was to find the .pst files of Clinton's
emails that were transferred by Combetta, in order to reconstruct, to
the extent possible, the deleted emails. They further told us that the
attorneys' own communications following Clinton's tenure, with either
Clinton or other clients, would mostly consist of items protected by
privilege, and that they had already obtained records of communications
between Clinton's attorneys and PRN staff from
PRN.^[^99^](#fn99){#fnref99 .footnote-ref}^ Similarly, the Lead Analyst
acknowledged that he might not have been able to view such emails even
with legal process due to privilege and probable cause concerns. He
stated, "This was not a snap decision. This decision was made, and
this was the best and most effective way to.obtain this content. And
there's going to be trade-offs involved in that."

Most of the Department and FBI witnesses we interviewed told us that
they were ultimately satisfied with the consent agreements to search the
Mills and Samuelson laptops and did not feel that the consent agreements
unduly limited their investigation. In addition, some witnesses told us
that in the end they believed that the FBI obtained more through the
consent agreements than it would have obtained through a subpoena or
search warrant. For example, Prosecutor 4 stated that that he told the
FBI "repeatedly in no uncertain terms that I thought that the
probability of success on a grand jury subpoena for the laptops
because of a motion to quash was, that they would get some things,
but the vast majority of what they wanted, they would not get."
Similarly, the Lead Analyst told us that he eventually learned that
sometimes consent allows the FBI to obtain "a broader swath of
material."

**5. Review of the Laptops**

The FBI and Department witnesses told us that they ultimately did not
identify evidence on the Mills or Samuelson laptops that changed the
outcome of the investigation. According to documents we reviewed, the
team recovered 9,000 emails on Mills's laptop, which were mostly
duplicates of the emails included within the 30,490 produced to the
State Department, and they found no new classified emails. The team was
able to recover "approximately 112 files" from Samuelson's laptop, but
the analysts did not believe these files contained "work-related
material."

**E. Involvement of Senior Department and FBI Officials**

Witnesses told us, and documents show, that the issues surrounding the
culling laptops and testimony was one of the few issues in the Midyear
investigation that was briefed to high-level Department officials. The
highest level Department official involved in substantive decisionmaking
regarding the culling testimony and laptops, including the decision to
grant immunity, was Toscas. Toscas told us that while he agreed with the
prosecutors that there were complicated privilege concerns, he also
agreed with the FBI that the culling laptops had to be reviewed and that
the prosecutors had more leverage than they realized in negotiating with
Wilkinson.

Toscas told the OIG that he briefed Lynch on the negotiations with
Wilkinson because of the potential for litigation, and because Wilkinson
had stated that she planned to contact Department leadership. He stated
that Lynch responded that she knew Wilkinson and was familiar with her
aggressive style. He stated that Lynch told him, "Pursue whatever
you want to do, she's going to be that way. That is her reputation..
Tell the team to get what they need done." Based on that guidance,
Toscas told us that he conveyed to the line prosecutors to "be civil"
but "be just as aggressive back" to Wilkinson.

Lynch told us that she did not recall Toscas bringing to her attention
the prosecutors' difficulties negotiating with Wilkinson or conflict
with the FBI. However, she stated that in the spring of 2016 Toscas
briefed her and Yates that "additional laptops were found" and that
"because the people who owned the laptops were lawyers, in addition to
having had a connection with Secretary Clinton's team, there were issues
of privilege." She stated that the only reason this issue was brought to
her attention was because it "raised the possibility of litigation." She
further told us that the team was able to "resolve" the issues without
litigation, but she did not "know the specifics." In addition, Lynch
stated that she and Wilkinson had been "prosecutors together in
Brooklyn" and that, based on that experience, she described Wilkinson's
"aggressive" style to Toscas. Yates and Carlin similarly told us that
they were briefed on the Mills and Samuelson issues, but could not
remember many details. Carlin stated that at one point he reached out to
McCabe to discuss the issues and that he "fully agreed" with the
recommendation of the prosecutors that "trying to do an adversarial
search warrant on a lawyer's office" would result in the case being
"tied up in litigation for a period of time."

On the FBI side, Comey, McCabe, and Baker were all substantively
involved with the debate with the prosecutors over whether and how to
obtain the culling testimony and laptops. McCabe stated, "I was very
clear about this with the Director, that we could not conclude this
investigation in a credible way until we had done everything humanly
possible to look at those laptops, fully realizing that it likely, there
may not be anything on them." He stated he also made this point clear to
"Carlin, Toscas, and others." Comey told the OIG that he agreed with the
FBI team that the culling laptops were "critically important." He
stated:

I believe we could not credibly complete this investigation without
getting access to those laptops, and that I was not going to agree to
complete this investigation until we had access to those laptops
because.we just couldn't credibly say we had done all we could do, if
we didn't do everything possible to see, is there a forensic trace of
emails that were deleted and can we tell whether there was obstructive
intent.

Comey, Baker, and other FBI witnesses told us that they believed the
prosecutors were overly cautious about obtaining the laptops, because
they were intimidated by high-powered defense counsel like Wilkinson.
Referencing the prosecutors' concerns about obtaining the laptops, Comey
stated:

And I remember a general concern that.there was a sense that the
prosecutors didn't want to do things that were too overt or too
aggressive and I don't know whether that extended to the use of a grand
jury or not..

But there was a sense that there was a general lack of aggressiveness
and willingness to take steps that would roil the waters. In my judgment
honestly, was that that wasn't politically motivated that's just the
normal cowardice.this is the normal fear and conservatism and the
higher profile the matter, the more afraid sometimes the prosecutors
are.

And so I didn't attribute that to a political motive..

Lynch and Yates told us that they were unaware of any complaints that
the prosecutors were not sufficiently aggressive, or that they were
believed by the FBI to be intimidated by high-powered defense counsel.
Lynch stated, "I don't remember that being conveyed to me. You know,
agents always think that prosecutors aren't aggressive enough. But they
don't know the discussions and decisions that go behind the decisions as
to.what steps you're going to take." She said that she would have
viewed any such complaints as part of the normal dialogue that often
occurs between prosecutors and agents unless someone had brought the
complaints to her as a "catalogue" of specific decisions that were
problematic.

Comey told us that he addressed the laptop issue with Yates, because he
was concerned that higher level Department officials needed to be
involved. He stated:

I think I had the sense that there's nobody home. That the grownups
aren't home at Justice because they've, they're stepping away from this.
And so to be fair to myself, I think the laying over this was this sense
that, in a way Carlin and above has abdicated responsibility for this.

However, despite his testimony that the prosecutors were not aggressive
enough with Wilkinson and that higher level Department officials were
not engaged,

Comey told us that he did not discuss his concerns with the Department,
ask the Department to assign new prosecutors, or seek the appointment of
a special counsel.^[^100^](#fn100){#fnref100 .footnote-ref}^ As
discussed in Section II.A.2 of Chapter Six of this report, Comey told
the OIG that he told Yates in April 2016 that the closer they got to the
political conventions, the more likely he would be to insist that a
special counsel be appointed. Comey said that his comment to Yates was
motivated in part by his frustration that it was taking the Midyear
prosecutors too long to obtain the Mills and Samuelson laptops. However,
as explained in Section VII of Chapter Six, we did not find evidence
that Comey ever seriously considered seeking the appointment of a
special counsel. His reasons for not seeking the appointment of a
special counsel or even seeking the assignment of new prosecutors were
that he had the "A-team" working on the investigation on the FBI side
and it was "too late in the game" at that point. In addition, Comey
stated that he believed Yates "must have done something" in response to
his discussion with her, "because the team perceived an adrenaline
injection into the DOJ's side that we had not seen before" and secured
the culling testimony and laptops. Comey indicated to the OIG that he
was satisfied with this result, stating, "We got access, we negotiated
access to the laptops and interviews of the lawyers, so the team got
what the investigators thought they needed."

**F. Motivations behind the Culling Testimony and Laptop Dispute**

Several FBI officials told us that they perceived that the prosecutors
were reluctant to obtain the culling laptops and testimony, but they did
not believe that such reluctance was motivated by bias or political
considerations. Comey stated, "There was serious concern about the
reluctance to pursue the laptops.I had no reason to believe that was
driven by an improper consideration."

Based on the evidence we reviewed, Comey and others at the FBI were
primarily motivated in the debate over obtaining the culling testimony
and laptops by a desire to credibly complete the investigation and to do
so sufficiently in advance of the election to not be perceived as
political. Indeed, witnesses told us, and contemporaneous notes show,
that by the time the Midyear team was debating how to handle Mills and
Samuelson, the team generally agreed that the investigation was headed
toward a declination and did not believe that it was likely that
anything found on the culling laptops would change that outcome. For
example, according to Laufman's notes from May 11, 2016, Strzok told
Laufman that although he did not believe that finding something on the
culling laptops that would change the outcome of the investigation was
likely, it was nonetheless important to secure them from an
"investigative standpoint."

In addition, the notes of both Department and FBI employees show that
beginning as early as May 2016, Comey conveyed to his employees a sense
of urgency to complete the Midyear investigation. For example, Page
wrote in her notes from a meeting on May 9, 2016, "Need to act with
incredible urgency." In the same notes, she included a reminder to
herself to "call John Carlin" and ask, "do your people know D's
urgency?" The next day, an analyst wrote in her notes:

The Lead Analyst and Pete

Meeting with Director Sense of urgency

Similarly, Laufman's May 11, 2016 notes state:

Director Comey.

- Extraordinary sense of urgency.
- As get closer to election would be more difficult to close - Risk of
    perception that won't be credible, be seen as partisan. FBI
    desires to wrap up in weeks, not months.

Moreover, as described in Chapter Six, Comey shared with Baker, McCabe,
Rybicki, Priestap, Strzok, the Lead Analyst, and Page his first draft of
a public statement recommending that no charges be pressed against
Clinton in early May 2016, before the Midyear team interviewed Mills and
Samuelson or obtained the culling laptops.

As described above, Strzok and Page were two of the strongest advocates
of obtaining the culling testimony and laptops by compulsory process. On
May 4, 2016, a few weeks before Mills and Samuelson were voluntarily
interviewed regarding the culling process and a little over a month
before the FBI obtained the culling laptops, Strzok and Page exchanged
the following text messages. The sender of each message is identified
after the timestamp.

8:40 p.m., Page: "And holy shit Cruz just dropped out of the race.

It's going to be a Clinton Trump race. Unbelievable."

8:41 p.m., Strzok: "What?!?!??"

8:41 p.m., Page: "You heard that right my friend."

8:41 p.m., Strzok: "I saw trump won, figured it would be a bit."

8:41 p.m., Strzok: "Now the pressure really starts to finish MYE..."

8:42 p.m., Page: "It sure does. We need to talk about follow up call
tomorrow. We still never have."

The same day, at 8:48 p.m., Strzok sent a similar text message to the
Lead Analyst. However, the Lead Analyst responded, "Did he? We need to
finish it well and promptly, but it's more important that we do it well.
A wise man once said that." The Lead Analyst told us that the "wise man"
referenced in his text message was Comey.

Both Strzok and Page told us that the May 4, 2016 text message exchange
was not an example of them allowing their political viewpoints to impact
their work on the Midyear investigation. Rather, they told us that Comey
had expressed a desire complete the investigation as far in advance of
the elections as possible to avoid impacting the political process, and
the fact that the presidential race was down to two candidates was a
milestone that enhanced that sense of urgency. They both told us that
their desire to move quickly to finish Midyear was not impacted by
Donald Trump, in particular, securing the nomination over the other
Republican candidates.

**IX. Interview of Former Secretary Clinton**

The interview of Hillary Clinton took place on Saturday, July 2, 2016.
Comey provided a few reasons for conducting the interview on a Saturday,
including to complete the interview as soon as possible after the team
finished all other investigative steps, to accommodate Clinton's
schedule, and to "keep very low visibility." Comey told us that he
received a briefing before the interview regarding general parameters,
including when the interview would take place and who would be
conducting it. However, he stated that he was not involved in
formulating the questions for the interview.

We reviewed several issues related to the Clinton interview, including:
the decision to conduct her interview last; a debate over the number of
FBI agents and Department employees who would attend her interview and
whether there were any efforts to adjust that number for political
reasons; the conduct of the interview; the decision to allow Mills and
Samuelson to attend the interview as Clinton's attorneys even though
they were also witnesses in the investigation; and the decision to
conduct a voluntary interview rather than subpoena Clinton before the
grand jury.

**A. Decision to Conduct Clinton's Interview Last**

Witnesses told us that interviewing Clinton at the end of the
investigation was logical. Prosecutor 3 told us that generally if
investigators want to determine whether someone "at the top" is
culpable, they first want to see what "lower level people have to say."
Prosecutor 3 told us that none of the prosecutors or agents disagreed
with the decision to interview Clinton last.

Witnesses told us that in the Midyear case in particular it made sense
to start at the bottom, because lower level people generally originated
the emails containing classified information on unclassified systems and
sent them to Clinton's closer aides who, in turn, forwarded them to
Clinton. Prosecutor 1 explained:

The natural thing to do was work your way up the chain. And I say
chain, but I also mean email chain.. And just get to the, get to the
end. The Secretary's email system was obviously the sort of foundation
of all of this and why it became an issue. So we needed to understand
the thinking in, in setting that up. So we naturally wanted to do her
last. Also, doing interviews in that order in my experience allows you
not to have to come back in serial fashion to the higherlevel people who
it's harder to get time with them.

Toscas stated that the team wanted to ask the lower level employees who
originated the emails that turned out to be classified why they wrote
the emails on unclassified systems, before asking the same questions of
Clinton's aides and

Clinton herself. Comey told us that one of the strategies behind
interviewing Clinton last was that the interviewing agents would know
enough information from other witnesses that they could test Clinton's
credibility by asking her questions to which they already knew the
answers.

**B. Number of People Attending ("Loaded for Bear" Text Message)**

Witnesses told us that there were disagreements within the Midyear team
regarding who should attend the interviews of certain key players in the
investigation. They stated that Laufman insisted on attending certain
interviews, including Clinton's interview, although he normally did not
attend interviews. The FBI took the position that if Laufman would be at
an interview, Strzok, who was roughly his counterpart at the FBI, should
also be at the same interview.

Strzok and Page told us, and contemporaneous emails and notes show, that
they and other members of the Midyear team, including the line
prosecutors, were concerned about the number of people attending
Clinton's interview and Laufman's insistence on attending. These
discussions started well before Clinton's July 2
interview.^[^101^](#fn101){#fnref101 .footnote-ref}^ On February 24,
2016, Strzok emailed Priestap that Laufman had called him earlier
stating that he "felt strongly about DoJ bringing four attorneys
(Laufman + 3), and that he was going to raise it up his chain."
Strzok further wrote that he told Laufman that raising the issue up the
chain would be "necessary because the DD had indicated the group should
be 2-2," meaning two agents and two prosecutors. Strzok forwarded this
email to Page and another employee, who was also an advisor to McCabe,
two minutes later. Strzok told us, and the email chain that followed
shows, that Strzok agreed with McCabe that two agents and two
prosecutors would be ideal, but he was amenable to three agents and
three prosecutors as a compromise. However, both McCabe and Strzok were
opposed to allowing four prosecutors to attend the interview.

Later that evening, Strzok and Page exchanged several text messages
about the dilemma over how many people should attend Clinton's
interview. Based on a review of this exchange, Strzok was concerned that
if only two agents and two prosecutors attended the interview and
Laufman insisted on being one of the prosecutors, it would be difficult
for Strzok to decide whether to send two case agents or himself and one
case agent. The following text messages were part of this exchange. The
sender of each message is identified after the timestamp.

10:32 p.m., Page: "Do you or Bill Priestap fundamentally believe
that 3 and 3 is the RIGHT thing for the case? If the answer is no, then
you call McCabe's advisor back and say we're good as is. You have
never wavered from saying 2 and 2 is best. I don't get what the
hesitation is now."

10:52 p.m., Page: "One more thing: she might be our next president. The
last thing you need us going in there loaded for bear. You think she's
going to remember or care that it was more doj than fbi?"

10:56 p.m., Strzok: "Agreed."

Page sent a similar text message to an advisor to McCabe a few minutes
after her text message to Strzok, and later to McCabe himself. With
McCabe's advisor, she had the following exchange.

10:56 p.m., Page: "Hey, if you have one opportunity to discuss further
with andy, please convey the following: She might be our next president.
The last thing we need is us going in there loaded for bear, when it is
not operationally necessary. You think she's going to remember or care
that it was more doj than fbi? This is as much about reputational
protection as anything."

11:00 p.m., Advisor: "I'll catch him before the morning brief to give
him this nugget..

The next morning, on February 25, 2016, this exchange continued as
follows.

4:10 a.m., Page: "Hey I'll just text andy this morning with my thought."

4:11 a.m., Advisor: "Sounds good."

The text message to McCabe was on February 25, 2016, at 7:41 a.m.:

Page: "Hey, you've surely already considered this, but in my view our
best reason to hold the line at 2 and 2 is: She might be our next
president. The last thing we need is us going in there loaded for bear,
when it is not operationally necessary. You think she's going to
remember or care that it was more doj than fbi? This is as much about
reputational protection as anything."

The next text message exchange between McCabe and Page was in the
evening on February 25, 2016:

9:16 p.m., Page: "Hey I'm sorry. It's just wildly aggravating how much
churn has gone on this. Have a good night."

9:50 p.m., McCabe: "Agree. Strongly."

Page told us that the term "loaded for bear" in her mind meant "a ton of
people," such that the FBI was "trying to intimidate." She stated that
the message she was trying to send in her text message was not that
Clinton should be treated differently, but that she should be handled
the same as any other witness the FBI interviews. She further stated
that as a former prosecutor her "personal preference" would be to not
have too many people in an interview, because "that's just sort of
not conducive to both rapport-building and also just.what it looks
like.just pure optics." In addition, she told us that she believed
the additional interviewers were "unnecessary" and "if there is no value
to be added, then we should do things the way we always do things, which
is with a smaller, more discrete footprint." She further told us that,
while "it's irrelevant whether or not Clinton.would or would not
become president.if she did become president, I don't want her left
with a feeling that.the FBI marched in with an army of 50 in order to
interview me." In other words, Page stated that her concern had to do
with the "reputational risk" to the FBI.

McCabe's advisor told us that he was not substantively involved in the
Midyear investigation but, as an advisor to McCabe, he was sometimes
present when Midyear was discussed at meetings and copied on emails in
which Midyear was discussed. He stated that he believed that he was
involved in the late February conversations regarding how many Midyear
team members should attend Clinton's interview, because he was filling
in for Page at one point during the conversations. McCabe's advisor told
us that he did not recall the above text message exchange with Page,
likely because he was not substantively involved with the issues and was
distracted at the time he received it. McCabe's advisor stated that he
"did not know that the fact that Clinton might be our next President
might be one of those motivating factors in Pete's or in Lisa's mind in
determining the size of the interview team." After reviewing the text
message exchange during his OIG interview he stated:

My reaction to that is that that should not be a consideration in, in
determining the right investigative step to take in the investigation,
in determining the size of the team, the interview team. That.should
have no bearing on it. What's right for the case is right for the case,
and that's how we should make our decisions.

However, Strzok told us that he did not take Page's comment to mean that
"we need to treat her differently because she's the next president." He
further told us, "I am certain I made no decision based on anything
Clinton might be or become." Strzok stated that strategically, to
obtain "the best answer" it is "always ideal" to conduct an interview
with "two agents and the subject." He went on: "Now, if they want
counsel, fine. If you have a DOJ attorney, fine. But ideally.my
experience is the smaller the setting, the more effective the
interview." Strzok told us that the only relevance of her being the next
president was that "you don't want the president thinking you're a bunch
of clowns."

Similarly, McCabe stated that the "typical" way to run an interview is
with two agents and one attorney, and "one of the reasons for doing that
is to kind of keep the interviewees.defenses a little bit lower and
not make people so concerned." He stated that he understood Page to be
saying in her text message that she would not want the future president
to think the FBI was "a bunch of.brutes." In addition, McCabe told us
that when he wrote that he "agreed strongly" with Page, he was
agreeing that it was "ridiculous that we\'re still talking about who is
going to what interview from which side," not that the team should not
go into Clinton's interview too aggressively.

Several other FBI and Department witnesses we interviewed corroborated
Page's, Strzok's, and McCabe's testimony that typically the FBI limits
the number of interviewers in an interview for strategic investigative
purposes, and that Laufman's insistence on attending certain interviews
caused frustration within the FBI. For example, Agent 2 stated, "when
the room gets too big.it\'s hard as the interviewer to try to build
that connection with the person you\'re interviewing.to get a good
interview." AAG Carlin told us that disputes regarding which prosecutors
and agents will attend an interview are common. He further told us that
"to do an effective interview you don't want to have 50 people in the
room." As noted in Section VI of this chapter, Laufman told us that he
attended the interviews of Clinton and other key witnesses to ensure
that those interviews were handled properly and to ensure that he had a
complete picture of the investigation before accepting the FBI's and the
prosecutors' recommendations.

Ultimately, Clinton's interview was attended by Agents 1 and 2, Strzok,
Laufman, and all four line prosecutors. McCabe stated that the number of
people that ultimately attended Clinton's interview shows that
investigative steps were not influenced by a desire to go easy on
Clinton. In addition, multiple witnesses told us that they never heard
anyone discussing the need to go easy on Clinton in light of her
candidacy for president and that any such discussions would have been
inappropriate. Carlin stated that such discussions would have been
"thoroughly unacceptable and no one on our team would have done that."

**C. Conduct of Clinton's Interview**

Both agents and prosecutors told us that by the time of Clinton's
interview they did not believe criminal charges were likely because they
had conducted all other investigative steps and, absent a confession
from Clinton, they had concluded that there was insufficient evidence of
intent. Comey told us that by early May 2016 (when he circulated a first
draft of a public statement recommending that the Midyear investigation
be closed without prosecution), the team had not "found anything that
seemed to the team or to me as a case that DOJ would prosecute" and he
had a "reasonable confidence read at this point that barring something
else, this looks like it's on a path" toward declination. However, he
stated that if Clinton had "lied to us in a way that we thought we could
prove, that would have changed everything." Prosecutor 1 stated that
there were important topics the team wanted to cover with Clinton,
including whether she was aware that classified information was present
in her emails, her understanding of the highly classified SAP material
contained in some of her emails, why she used a private email account on
a private server, and security measures she took when emailing overseas.

Agents 1 and 2 were the case agents that conducted Clinton's interview,
in the presence of all four prosecutors, Laufman, Strzok, and Clinton's
attorneys. Witnesses told us that Agent 2 focused on questioning Clinton
regarding her involvement in emails that the FBI determined to contain
classified information, while Agent 1 questioned her regarding her
server and the production of emails to the State Department by her
attorneys.

As discussed in Chapter Twelve, we identified instant messages from
Agent 1 that raised concerns about potential bias. This included an
instant message exchange on November 8, 2016 (Election Day), between
Agent 1 and Agent 5 (who were in a relationship at the time and are now
married), in which Agent 1 messaged, "You should know;.... that I'm....
with her."^[^102^](#fn102){#fnref102 .footnote-ref}^ (Punctuation in
original). Additionally, we observed instant messages in which Agent 1
expressed concerns about the quality of the Midyear investigation, as
described in Section XI of this chapter. Two of the instant message
exchanges we identified occurred close in time to the Clinton interview.

On June 28, 2016, four days before the Clinton interview, Agent 1 sent
an instant message complaining about the numerous people involved in
preparing for the Clinton interview. Agent 1 messaged, ".very
aggravating making this flow with 20+ voices for disparate information
anyway. We have nothing -- shouldn't sic even be interviewing.
Today, someone said we really need to call out that she had two phones
when her excuse not to have a state bb State Department Blackberry
in the first place was because she didnt sic want to carry two
phones." Agent 1 sent a series of messages that continued, "My god..
I'm actually starting to have embarrassment sprinkled on my
disappointment.. Ever been forced to do something you adamantly
opposed."

We asked Agent 1 about this instant message exchange. He told us that
when he wrote "20+ voices" he was referring to the number of FBI and
Department employees involved in the Clinton interview preparation. He
stated that Agent 2 and he were "working together well," and they "just
kept saying to each other when are we going to actually have time to
prepare for this other than prepare everyone else for it?" He stated
that the frustration expressed in the instant message exchange was
related to his sense that Midyear was not the "normal" case where the
FBI "culminates" with an interview of a subject who introduced
classified information onto an unclassified system, unlike Clinton who
mostly received classified material from others. We asked Agent 1 if he
thought that the Clinton interview was unnecessary. Agent 1 told us he
thought the interview was necessary and stated:

I think we needed to get statements from the Secretary about what she
knew this information to be, she was the Secretary of State, so if you
thought this was classified, why did you not, if you had an impression
it was classified, why did you not stop it, or why did you not say to
the people that were underneath you that you should handle this better?
What did you know about where it was? How do you understand a server to,
to work, and do you know that a copy resides there? Those types of
things, to include a couple that we found. I don\'t, I don\'t want to
make it sound like there was no reason to interview her. That,
including, including a couple of emails we found where there were
portion markings, what we thought to be portion markings inside of the
email. And she had made statements before that.there were no emails
that were marked classified.

Agent 1 told us that he did not know what he meant by "forced to do
something you adamantly opposed." Agent 1 stated that this may have been
a reference to not being able to prevent Mills and Samuelson from
attending the Clinton interview.

On July 6, 2016, four days after Clinton's interview, Agent 1 sent an
instant message in which he stated that he was "done interviewing the
President," referring to Clinton. We asked Agent 1 if he thought of
Clinton as the next president while conducting the Midyear
investigation. Agent 1 stated, "I think my impression going into the
election in that personal realm is that all of the polls were favoring
Hillary Clinton." We asked Agent 1 if he treated Clinton differently
because of this assumption. Agent 1 stated, "Absolutely not. I think the
message they said that our leadership told us and our actions were to
find whatever was there and whatever, whatever that means is what it
means."

We interviewed all eight of the FBI and Department officials that
attended Clinton's interview, and none of the witnesses we interviewed
expressed concerns about the way the case agents handled the interview.
Prosecutor 1 told us that Prosecutors 1 and 2 and the case agents did
"most of the talking during the interview," which was "led by the
agents." Prosecutor 1 further told us that generally "agents would lead
the interviews, and attorneys would interject as needed, and we'd
pause after different, as we transitioned to make sure things were
covered." In addition, Prosecutor 1 stated that, "The agents had a good
rapport with Clinton." Prosecutor 1 further stated, generally, that
the agents did a "good job" in interviews and that he did not have
concerns about the agents not

"pushing hard enough."

Based on a review of the FD-302 and contemporaneous notes from Clinton's
interview, Clinton told the Midyear team that she chose to use a
personal Blackberry connected to her personal email account for official
communications for convenience, and she denied using personal email or a
personal server to avoid FOIA or Federal Records Act requirements.
Clinton further told the FBI that during her tenure she received
classified information through secure briefings, secure calls,
classified hard documents, and classified faxes, and she "did not recall
receiving any emails she thought should not be on an unclassified
system." According to the FD-302, Clinton stated that she was aware that
her email was supported by a private server, but she did not know the
details of the different server systems she used. The FD-302 indicated
that the interviewers showed Clinton numerous unmarked emails she had
received containing information that was determined to have been
classified. Clinton responded with respect to each email that she did
not believe the information contained in the email was classified or
that she relied on the State Department employees who worked for her to
use their judgment in determining whether information was classified and
appropriate to send on unclassified systems. Agent 1 told us that the
interviewers asked "probing questions" with respect to each of Clinton's
responses. Prosecutor 1 told us, and our review of other FD-302s showed,
that Clinton's responses to these questions were consistent with the
testimony of other witnesses on the email chains, including Clinton's
senior aides who forwarded classified information to her.

The FD-302 and contemporaneous notes indicate that the interviewers
asked Clinton about her understanding of her record keeping obligations,
the culling process that was used to provide her work-related emails to
the State Department, and the deletion of emails from her server.
According to the FD-302, Clinton told the FBI, among other things, that
she did not recall being asked to turn over her email records upon her
departure from State and that she believed her workrelated emails were
"captured by her practice of sending them to state.gov email addresses
of her staff." She stated that, upon receiving a request from the State
Department in 2014, she "expected" her attorneys to turn over any emails
that were "work-related or arguably work-related," but she did not
otherwise participate in developing the culling process. Agent 1 told
us, consistent with the FD-302, that he pressed her on her lack of
involvement in the State Department production, by showing her a
work-related email that was not produced as part of the 30,490. Clinton
responded that she agreed that the email was work-related and did not
know why it was not included in the State Department production. Clinton
told the FBI that in December 2014, after the production of her
work-related emails to the State Department, her staff asked her what
she wanted to do with her personal emails and she responded that she
"did not need them anymore." The FD-302 states that "Clinton never
deleted, nor did she instruct anyone to delete, her email to avoid
complying with Federal Records Act, FOIA, or State or FBI requests for
information" and that she "trusted her legal team" would comply with the
March 3, 2015 Congressional preservation request.

In addition, the interviewers asked Clinton about an email that
contained a parenthetical with a "(C)" at the beginning. According to
the prosecutors, Clinton received three email chains during her State
Department tenure that contained at least one paragraph that began with
a '(C),' a classification marking used to denote information classified
at the Confidential level. The prosecutors stated that these were the
only emails containing classification markings that the FBI identified
during its investigation, the emails did not contain any markings other
than the one or two paragraphs in each email beginning with a "(C)," and
as of July 6, 2016, the State Department had not responded to the FBI's
request for a determination as to as to whether the information in these
three emails was classified at the time the emails were sent. The
prosecutors further stated that the State Department had determined
through the FOIA process that only one of the three emails contained
information that was classified as of July 6, 2016, and that this email
was classified at the Confidential level. According to the FD-302 from
Clinton's interview, Clinton told the FBI that she did not know what the
"(C)" meant and "speculated it was a reference to paragraphs ranked in
alphabetical order." The FD-302 indicates that the FBI had added a
classification marking of "Confidential" to the top of the document and
that, upon noticing this marking, Clinton asked if the "(C)" meant
Confidential. Clinton told the interviewers that she did not agree that
the information contained in the email was classified, because it
described information that was already in the press. Witnesses told us,
and contemporaneous emails show, that the FBI and Department officials
who attended Clinton's interview found that her claim that she did not
understand the significance of the "(C)" marking strained credulity.
Agent 1 stated, "I filed that in the bucket of hard to impossible to
believe." Agent 1 further stated that he and the other interviewers
asked Clinton about her understanding of the "(C)" markings four or five
times, but she did not change her answer. He told us, "I also don't know
at that point in the interview what else we could have done besides all
the different ways that we asked it."

Comey told us that one of the purposes of interviewing Clinton was to
see if she would be truthful. However, he stated that the agents that
conducted the interview found her credible and were surprised at how
"technically illiterate" she was. While Comey did not specifically
comment on the team's reactions to Clinton's testimony regarding the
"(C)" portion markings, he stated, "By her demeanor, she was credible
and open and all that kind of stuff, but---so I can't sit here and tell
you I believed her. I can only tell you, in no particular could we prove
that she was being untruthful to us." The prosecutors similarly
indicated that the team did not believe it could prove that Clinton had
been dishonest during her interview or that she knew that the document
with the "(C)" marking was classified. The prosecutors stated that the
"(C)" markings were somewhat ambiguous given their placement in the
email chains and the fact that the classification marking 'Confidential'
was not spelled out anywhere in the email, let alone in a readily
apparent manner. They further stated that Clinton's statement regarding
her knowledge of the "(C)" marking was not one that could be
affirmatively disproved.

**D. Decision to Allow Mills and Samuelson to Attend Clinton Interview**

According to the FD-302 for Clinton's interview, Mills and Samuelson
attended the interview as Clinton's counsel, in addition to Clinton's
three attorneys from the Williams and Connolly law firm. Numerous FBI
and Department witnesses told us that they were opposed to Mills and
Samuelson attending Clinton's interview, because Mills and Samuelson
were also witnesses in the investigation. They stated that they were
concerned both that Mills and Samuelson could influence Clinton's
testimony and that their presence would be bad from an "optics"
standpoint.

Prosecutor 1 told us that the prosecutors first learned that Mills and
Samuelson planned to attend Clinton's interview less than a week before
the interview took place. Witnesses told us that the prosecutors
contacted Kendall to discuss their concerns about Mills and Samuelson
attending, but that Kendall "pushed back." Several Midyear team members
stated, and contemporaneous notes show, that after the call with Kendall
the Midyear team conferred more than once and that everyone agreed that,
although they were not comfortable with the situation, they could not
prevent Clinton from bringing her counsel of choice to a voluntary
interview. Laufman stated, "We gave careful thought to whether we had
any grounds to bar admission to Mills and Samuelson from the interview
of Secretary Clinton. And we determined we did not have a legal or bar
rule-slashethics based premise to do so." Several witnesses also told us
that they were more concerned with the "optics" of Mills and Samuelson
attending than them influencing Clinton's testimony, because they were
confident that Clinton had already been well prepared by her attorneys
and had probably conferred with Mills and Samuelson in advance of the
interview in any event (which the investigators could not prevent).

Based on the evidence we reviewed, the issue of Mills's and Samuelson's
attendance was raised up the chain within the FBI through former
Director Comey and within NSD through Toscas. According to FBI Attorney
1, the issue was discussed at a meeting she attended that included
Comey, McCabe, Baker, Rybicki, Deputy General Counsel Anderson, EAD
Steinbach, AD Priestap, Strzok, Page, and the Lead Analyst. FBI Attorney
1 stated that the lawyers in the meeting, including Comey, all agreed
that there was no legal basis to exclude Mills and Samuelson from the
interview. Comey told us that he could not remember the specifics of his
conversations regarding Mills and Samuelson attending the Clinton
interview; however, he stated that he believed "it was a fairly brief
discussion because our judgment was it's an essential interview, we've
washed them out. We've looked at their conduct pretty carefully and so
those two things together, so we don't really have a basis for
excluding.either of them from the interview."

Lynch and Yates both told us they did not recall being briefed on Mills
and Samuelson attending Clinton's interview. Carlin told us, "I don't
remember Mills's and Samuelson's attendance being a major issue so
I'm assuming they worked that out without, I kind of more was just
briefed that that was occurring rather than that there was some dispute
over it."

The prosecutors told us that the team put a plan in place to prevent
Mills or Samuelson from influencing Clinton's testimony: if Mills or
Samuelson "actively involved themselves in the interview" they would
address the issue further at that time, possibly through a "side bar"
with Kendall. The prosecutors and agents that attended the interview all
told us that ultimately Mills and Samuelson did not interfere or object,
engage in side-bars with Clinton, or speak substantively during the
interview. Rather, Prosecutor 1 told us that Clinton's Williams and
Connolly attorneys did the "actual.lawyering, such that there was any
there."

Prosecutor 1 stated that they did not consult PRAO regarding the ethical
implications of Mills's and Samuelson's attendance. We asked the
prosecutors whether they spoke to Wilkinson about their concerns or
suggested to Wilkinson that her clients' attendance could violate their
own ethical duties, given that at the time of the culling testimony and
laptop dispute Wilkinson had indicated that her client's interests were
different from Clinton's in the Midyear
investigation.^[^103^](#fn103){#fnref103 .footnote-ref}^ They told us
they had not done so, and Laufman stated he did not recall considering
those ethical concerns. However, Laufman and FBI Attorney 1 both told us
that if there was such a conflict, Clinton could waive it. In addition,
Prosecutor 1 stated that the team did not question at the time of the
Clinton interview whether Mills and Samuelson in fact had ongoing
attorney-client relationships with Clinton, because the prosecutors had
already concluded there were ongoing attorney-client relationships when
they sought subpoenas for the culling laptops.^[^104^](#fn104){#fnref104
.footnote-ref}^

E. Consideration of Subpoenaing Clinton before the Grand Jury
-------------------------------------------------------------

We asked several witnesses whether they considered subpoenaing Clinton
before the grand jury in order to avoid Mills's and Samuelson's presence
at the interview. We also asked whether they considered simply refusing
to interview Clinton if she insisted on having Mills and Samuelson
present, given the pressure on Clinton to cooperate with the
investigation---in other words, whether the Midyear team underestimated
its strategic position against Clinton's attorneys.

Some witnesses told us that use of the grand jury was the only way to
legally prevent Mills and Samuelson from attending, but that the team
did not seriously consider that option. Prosecutor 4 stated:

I thought Mills being present was idiotic. And I believe that

Prosecutor 1 and I talked about it. And I said, well, look, we
cannot exclude her as a legal matter unless we are willing to threaten
to throw Hillary in the grand jury, at which point I'm fairly confident
that they will fold. And Prosecutor 1 and I discussed it. And I
don\'t know if he ever raised that possibility. But it was obvious to me
that nobody was willing to, to threaten, to threaten Hillary in the
grand jury.

However, Prosecutor 4 stated that his concern about Mills and Samuelson
attending Clinton's interview was "from an optics standpoint" and that
"from my vantage point, the cost-benefit analysis of trying to go
through and get somebody to authorize me to threaten to throw Hillary in
the grand jury was not worth getting the, the interview done at that
point." Prosecutor 3 told us that if the Midyear team insisted that
Mills and Samuelson not attend, Clinton likely would have relented
because of her desire to say publicly that she cooperated with the
investigation. Other FBI and Department witnesses we interviewed told us
that they simply did not consider these options.

The SSA told us that it would have been anomalous to subpoena Clinton
before the grand jury given that no other witnesses had testified before
the grand jury and Clinton, like the other witnesses, was cooperating.
Strzok told us that the team decided against subpoenaing Clinton to
testify before the grand jury because "the expectation of the
information we would get from her in either setting was not
substantively different," given that she had "extraordinary counsel"
preparing her.

Toscas told us that if Clinton had been required to testify before the
grand jury, members of the FBI team would not have been able to
participate in the interview. In addition, Laufman, Prosecutor 1, and
FBI Attorney 1 told us that admitting classified information before the
grand jury would have involved an uncertain and lengthy process of
obtaining approvals from the various government agencies that owned the
classified information. Prosecutor 1 stated that, even if the approvals
could be obtained, it is better to avoid sharing classified information
with the grand jury, if possible.

Laufman stated that subpoenaing Clinton to testify before the grand jury
would have been "a grossly disproportionate course of action in relation
to what we were dealing with and out of step with how we had
previously been conducting the investigation throughout its course." He
further stated, "We did not think this was worth blowing up the
investigation, and, and creating what almost certainly would have become
a matter of public knowledge that we had suddenly issued a grand jury
subpoena to the Secretary at this stage of the national electoral
process." He explained that throughout the investigation the team was
attempting to avoid "extrinsic information" from the investigation being
publicly disclosed and used for political purposes, and this was no
exception.

Witnesses told us that at the point of Clinton's interview, they had
conducted all other investigative steps and knew that there was
insufficient evidence to prosecute Clinton unless she incriminated
herself. Laufman told us that because the prosecutors did not believe a
subsequent trial was likely, they were not concerned that Mills's or
Samuelson's later testimony would be influenced by being privy to
Clinton's interview. Prosecutor 4 told us that if he had the
investigation to do over again, the one thing he would have done
differently was "insist that Mills not attend the Hillary interview."
However, he also stated that at that point he agreed with the rest of
the team that there was no prosecutable case and the main reason to have
put her in the grand jury was to avoid subjecting the investigation to
criticism.^[^105^](#fn105){#fnref105 .footnote-ref}^

Comey told us that he did not remember discussing with anyone the
possibility of subpoenaing Clinton before the grand jury. However, he
stated:

At that point, I really didn't think there was a there there, and the
question was, is she going to lie to us? She'd be as likely to lie to us
in a grand jury or in an interview. And I just suppose in the grand jury
is you've got the transcript, but we've got a bunch of agents taking
notes, so I don't think it would've mattered much to me at that point.

**X. FBI Inspection Division Internal File Review of the Midyear
Investigation**

In September and October 2017, the FBI assigned three SSAs (File Review
SSAs) from the Boston Field Office to the FBI's Inspection Division
(INSD) to conduct a special review of the Midyear investigation (File
Review).^[^106^](#fn106){#fnref106 .footnote-ref}^ Baker told us that he
proposed the File Review after being informed of the OIG's discovery of
text messages between Strzok and Page expressing political views. He
stated that once he learned of the text messages, he suggested to EAD
Carl Ghattas and possibly other senior FBI officials that a review team
be brought in to "look at the case and all the decisions that were made
in a quiet way." Baker further stated that the purposes of the File
Review were to "make sure that Strzok, Page, or others did not make
decisions in the case based on improper political considerations,
including failing to taken actions they should have," and to "make sure
that, from a management perspective, if other steps needed to be taken,
we should find that out quickly and take those steps, including
reopening the investigation." He told us that they decided that the File
Review team would not interview witnesses, because they did not want to
interfere with the ongoing OIG review. Baker stated that Ghattas took
the lead on the review.

Two of the SSAs who conducted the File Review had experience in the
FBI's Criminal Investigative Division (CID) while the third SSA had
experience in the FBI's Counterintelligence Division (CD). The File
Review SSAs told us that Ghattas requested that they do the File Review,
and that they met with Ghattas in FBI Headquarters at the start of their
review. They stated that they were instructed not to discuss their
review with other FBI employees. The File Review SSAs also told us that
they were not told about the text messages between Strzok and Page
before the start of the review. Baker told us he was unaware that the
File Review SSAs were not told about the text messages before the start
of the File Review.

File Review SSAs 2 and 3 told us that they understood the purpose of the
review to be to assess what the Midyear investigators appeared to have
done well, what investigative steps were missed, and what lessons could
be learned from the investigation. File Review SSA 2 stated that the
File Review was not intended to be a reinvestigation. The File Review
SSAs told us that their review was limited, by design, to the official
FBI Midyear file. They did not interview any witnesses nor did they
review any documents that were not included in the official file, such
as handwritten notes taken by Midyear team members during meetings,
emails or text messages sent or received by Midyear team members, or
materials maintained by the prosecutors or others Department officials.
They also did not review SAP material. File Review SSA 2 told us that
the team did not "intend for the file review necessarily to be
a.final.judgment or indictment on the FBI or on WFO or the case
agents. It was more just.here are our observations, and here are some
questions.should anyone else.take a look at this.take this into
consideration. That\'s kind of all we intended by it."

The File Review SSAs told us, consistent with their File Review Report,
that they conducted their review over the course of six days, between
September 5 and September 8, 2017, and between October 3 and 4, 2017;
however, the first day was mostly spent meeting with Ghattas and
locating the records to review. They stated that thereafter they spent
approximately 12 hours per day reviewing records in the official file,
discussing items they came across that caused them concern, and
recording information in spreadsheets. File Review SSAs 2 and 3 told us
that each File Review SSA focused on a different portion of the file,
and none of them individually reviewed the entire file. During the
course of their review, in addition to reviewing and discussing the
records, the File Review SSAs completed a first draft of the File Review
Report, which File Review SSA 1 finalized with minor edits thereafter.
The File Review SSAs told us that they all approved the final File
Review Report.

Under the heading "FBI Investigative Actions," the File Review Report
stated:

The File Review Team's analysis of the MIDYEAR EXAM investigation
did not find substantial or significant areas of investigative oversight
based on the stated goals of the investigation. In contrast, the File
Review Team assessed that the Midyear investigative team
conducted a thorough investigation within the constraints imposed by
DOJ. Appropriate witnesses were interviewed, records preserved,
information and computer devices obtained, and necessary business
records were subpoenaed to meet the goals of the investigation. FBI
resources such as Computer Analysis and Recovery Team (CART)
personnel, Intelligence personnel, communication analysis, and Cyber

Agents were skillfully and successfully utilized to review and fully

exploit substantial amounts of data in support of the investigation..
The efforts of the case Agents and case team should be commended.

Nonetheless, the File Review Report also contained criticisms of the
Midyear investigation. Generally, the File Review Report assessed that
it would have been better to run the Midyear investigation as a
traditional criminal investigation out of a Criminal Investigative
Division (CID) field office, rather than as a counterintelligence
investigation out of CD. The File Review SSAs expressed concern that
treating the investigation as a CD investigation with NSD oversight
resulted in more limited use of compulsory process such as grand jury
subpoenas and search warrants. However, the File Review SSAs told the
OIG that they were not aware of any precedent for handling a
counterintelligence investigation out of CID. File Review SSA 2 stated
that counterintelligence investigations "are always run out of the
Counterintelligence Division."^[^107^](#fn107){#fnref107 .footnote-ref}^

The File Review SSAs identified specific concerns with the Midyear
investigation, although we found that many of these concerns were the
result of the fact that the File Review SSAs had incomplete information.
For example, the File Review Report states, "No immunity in exchange for
testimony was observed in the investigation," and "one instance of a
proffer letter was observed," referring to the limited use immunity
agreement between the Department and John Bentel. The File Review SSAs
told us that they were unaware that the Midyear prosecutors also entered
into letter use immunity agreements with Combetta and
Pagliano.^[^108^](#fn108){#fnref108 .footnote-ref}^

The File Review SSAs told us, consistent with the File Review Report,
that they believed the Midyear agents relied too heavily on outlines
during interviews and did not ask sufficient follow-up questions.
However, they stated that they based this assessment only on their
review of the FD-302s. The Midyear SSA and Agent 1 told us that the CD
Division does not draft FD-302s in such a way that a reader would know
what follow-up questions were asked of witnesses; instead, the FD-302s
generally set forth each witness's ultimate statements in response to
series of questions.

In addition, the File Review SSAs told us that they considered the DIOG,
but did not consider any Department policies, such as the USAM,
regarding guidelines for obtaining evidence relevant to the Midyear
investigation. For example, they stated they did not consult the USAM
provisions regarding obtaining evidence from attorneys concerning their
representation of clients.

Based on these findings, the report concluded:

INSD assessed the FBI Midyear Exam investigation successfully determined
classified information was improperly stored and transmitted on
Clinton's email server, and classified information was compromised by
unauthorized individuals, to include foreign government's or
intelligence services, via cyber intrusion or other means referring to
compromises of email accounts associated with certain individuals who
communicated with Clinton's server, such as Blumenthal. However, the
structure of the investigation and prosecution team, as prescribed in
the CD PG, and treatment of the investigation as a traditional espionage
matter rather than a criminal investigation significantly hindered the
ability of the investigative team to obtain full, accurate and timely
information.

**XI. Instant Messages Relating to the Conduct of the Midyear
Investigation**

FBI employees have the ability to communicate internally via Microsoft
Lync instant messages when logged on to their FBI workstation. As part
of our review, the OIG identified contemporaneous instant messages in
which Agent 1 expressed concerns about the quality of the Midyear
investigation. These messages were sent to numerous FBI employees,
including an agent assigned to the Midyear filter team (Agent 5). Agent
1 and Agent 5, who are now married, were in a relationship for the
entirety of the Midyear investigation. We identified additional instant
messages sent by Agent 1 and Agent 5 that raised concerns about
potential bias. We discuss these messages and others in Chapter Twelve.

The Midyear filter team was responsible for conducting an initial review
of evidence obtained during the investigation and ensuring that nothing
that was either beyond the scope of the FBI's authority to review or
protected by a valid privilege was provided to the investigative team.
We found that Agent 1 and Agent 5 exchanged numerous instant messages
about the Midyear investigation. However, we identified no instances
where Agent 5 provided Midyear-related information to Agent 1 that
should have been withheld from the investigative team. Agent 1 and Agent
5 told us that their Midyear supervisors were aware of their
relationship by the end of 2015 at the latest and it was never
identified as a concern.

We asked Agent 1 generally about his use of instant messaging on his FBI
workstation. Agent 1 told us that he believed that instant messages were
not retained by the FBI and therefore used less caution with those
communications than he would have with other types of communications,
such as email or text messages. Agent 1 also repeatedly emphasized that
the instant messages served as a type of emotional release for him.
Agent 1 stated:

I took that instant messaging as an informal, akin to a conversation
almost, almost, you know, water cooler style. I think in there..
There is personal and emotional communications between my then
girlfriend, now wife. There is some jocularity there. There is, you
know, I think, I think some outlet, stress outlet..

You know, guys, I just, I think this was primarily used as a personal
conversation venting mode for me. I'm embarrassed for it. I don't think
that it affected my actions.

Agent 1 told us that the nature of his workspace also contributed to his
use of instant messaging. Agent 1 explained that for the Midyear
investigation he was relocated to FBI Headquarters and placed inside a
SCIF with others on the Midyear team. Due to this, he was effectively
unable to use his personal electronic devices at work and was also in a
small space with his coworkers and supervisors, thereby preventing phone
communication. Agent 1 emphasized that these were not excuses for the
substance of his instant messages, but explanations for why he used them
as an outlet for "stress relief" about frustrations he encountered at
work. Agent 1 described his instant messages with Agent 5 as personal
communications with his significant other that they used for mutual
support and complaints. Similarly, Agent 1 stated his instant messages
with FBI personnel not assigned to the Midyear investigations were
typically communications with friends. He also noted that many of these
communications were initiated by FBI personnel seeking information on
the Midyear investigation. Agent 5 echoed many of Agent 1's
explanations, stating that she considered instant messaging to be a
private channel to communicate with Agent 1. Agent 5 told us that Agent
1 was her outlet at work for "emotional outbursts" and "relief of
stress."

Agent 1 sent instant messages in the initial months of the Midyear
investigation commenting on the investigation. Some of these messages
are listed below, along with the date sent and the recipient.

September 2, 2015, to Agent 5: "Have a really bad feeling about
this.this case.situation.. No control and horrible decisions
and chaos on the most meaningless thing I've ever done with people
acting like fucking 9/11."

September 25, 2015, to an FBI employee: ".I dont care about it. I
think its continued waste of resources and time and focus.."

October 26, 2015, to Agent 5: "Its just so obvious how pointless this
exercise is. And everyone is so into it.."

We asked Agent 1 about these messages. Agent 1 told us that prior to
Midyear he had worked on other high-profile cases and part of the
sentiment he expressed in these messages was a reluctance to be involved
in another high-profile investigation. Agent 1 stated that he knew from
prior experience that decisions in such investigation were typically
made at higher levels. Agent 1 described the comment about the
investigation being "meaningless" as "a little exaggerated" and
explained that "maybe the intense scrutiny didn't seem commensurate to
what we had to do." Agent 1 explained, "The FBI absolutely needs to
investigate why

classified information is in a place where it should not be. I just, it
would, this is more probably an emotional comment on how scrutinized and
how focused and how continued, there's a continued focus on it to this
day."

Agent 1 also sent numerous messages that referenced "political"
considerations in the context of the Midyear investigation. We list
examples of these messages below with the date sent and the content of
the message along with context where necessary. Unless otherwise
identified, the recipients of the messages are FBI employees not
involved in the Midyear investigation.

January 15, 2016: Responding to a question of when the investigation
would be finished, Agent 1 stated, "My guess is March. Doesnt matter
what we have, political winds will want to beat the Primarys."

January 28, 2016: ".The case is the same is all of them. Alot of work
and bullshit for a political exercise."

February 1, 2016: ".Its primary season -- so we're being dictated to
now.."

February 1, 2016: "This is the biggest political shit show of them all.
No substance. Up at dawn -- pride swallowing seige. No headset and
hermetically sealed in SIOC."

February 2, 2016: Responding to a question about how the investigation
was going, "Going well.. Busy, and sometimes I feel for naught
(political exercise), but I feel good.."

May 6, 2016, to Agent 5: "pretty bad news today.someone has breathed
some political urgency into this.. Everyday DD brief and once a week
D brief from now on."

We asked Agent 1 about these messages. Agent 1 stated that he hoped
these messages "would just directly reflect upon me and not anybody else
that worked the case." He explained that these messages simply reflect
the fact that he wanted to work on something besides Midyear. We asked
Agent 1 whether these messages indicated that the Midyear investigation
was simply an exercise in "going through the motions." Agent 1
responded, "No. I think this investigation needed to be worked." He
later continued, "I think if classified information is found in a place
that it shouldn't be, there should be an investigation." Agent 1 added
that he felt the scrutiny and attention that Midyear received was not
"commensurate" with the nature of the violation the team was
investigating. As to the messages about timing, Agent 1 told us that at
some point in the investigation the "pace" increased and, although the
team was never given a "finish by" date, there was "a sense that things
were picking up."

On February 9, 2016, Agent 5 sent Agent 1 an instant message complaining
about a meeting the filter team had with a Department attorney and the
frustrating review task she was assigned. Agent 1 responded:

Yeah, I hear you. You guys have a shitty task, in a shitty environment.
To look for something conjured in a place where you cant find it, for a
case that doesnt matter and is predestined. All you ask for is
acknowledgment of that and clear guidance. But no. DOJ comes in there
every once in awhile and takes a wishy-washy, political, cowardice
stance. Salt meets wound. That is the environment love. Can't sugar coat
it. Now, what? What can you do? What can you control? Work hard, do the
best you can, and try to keep others motivated.

After reading this message during his OIG interview, Agent 1 stated:

I have no information that it was a pre-determined outcome by anyone. I
had, I had no statement from anyone that I can tell you that I worked
with that said this is where we're going.. I think even the
leadership that stopped by in the, in the, in our space always said that
as well. Whatever you find, you know, is what it is. You know, just,
just find what it was, and, you know, don't worry about anything else,
the outside noise.

All I can tell you is this is probably, I mean, it's a little
overwhelming to see all these messages at once, as probably somebody
who was, who wanted to do something else, I think.

Agent 1 stated that he could not recall anything specific to add to this
exchange.

In another exchange on February 4, 2016, Agent 1 and an FBI employee who
was not assigned to the Midyear investigation discussed Agent 1's
interview with a witness who assisted the Clintons at their Chappaqua
residence. Part of this exchange follows.

FBI Employee: "boom.how did the witness go"

Agent 1: "Awesome. Lied his ass off. Went from never inside the scif
sensitive compartmented information facility at res, to looked in
when it was being constructed, to removed the trash twice, to
troubleshot the secure fax with HRC a couple times, to everytime there
was a secure fax i did it with HRC. Ridic,"

FBI Employee: "would be funny if he was the only guy charged n this
deal"

Agent 1: "I know. For 1001. Even if he said the truth and didnt have a
clearance when handling the secure fax -- aint noone gonna do shit"

We asked Agent 1 about the implication in this message that no one would
be charged irrespective of what the team found. Agent 1 stated:

Yeah, I, I don't think I can say there's a specific person that I worked
with in this case that wouldn't charge him for that. I think it's a
general complaint of, you know, of FBI agents that are kind of, kind of
being emotional and, and complaining that no one is going to do
something about, about something.. But there's nothing specific that
I, that I can tell you.

Agent 1 told us he did not recall any discussion about whether this
witness should be charged with a crime.

In a January 19, 2016 message to Agent 4, Agent 1 stated, "What we want
to do and what we're going to be allowed to do are two different
things." Agent 1 told us that he did not remember this exchange and did
not know what he was referring to in this message. However, he stated
that he appears "to be venting a little bit" to Agent 4.

**XII. Analysis of Investigative Decisions**

In this part, we provide our analysis of whether the investigative
decisions taken in connection with the Midyear investigation that we
reviewed were based on improper considerations, including political
bias. As described in the Analytical Construct set forth in Chapter One
of this report, we selected for examination particular case decisions
that were the subject of public or internal controversy. For each
decision, we analyzed whether there was evidence of improper
considerations or evidence that the justifications offered for the
decision were a pretext for improper, but unstated, considerations. If a
choice made by the investigative team was among two or more reasonable
alternatives, we did not find that it was improper even if we believed
an alternative decision would have been more effective. Thus, a
determination by the OIG that a decision was not unreasonable does not
mean that the OIG has endorsed the decision or concluded that the
decision was the most effective among the options considered. We took
this analytical approach because our role as an OIG is not to
second-guess valid discretionary judgments made during the course of an
investigation, and this approach is consistent with the OIG's handling
of such questions in past reviews.

In undertaking this analysis, our task was made significantly more
difficult because of the text messages we discovered between Strzok and
Page, given the critical roles they played in most of the decisions made
by the FBI; the instant messages of Agent 1, who was one of four Midyear
case agents; and the instant messages of FBI Attorney 2, who was one of
the FBI attorneys assigned to the
investigation.^[^109^](#fn109){#fnref109 .footnote-ref}^ That these
employees used an FBI system or device to express political views about
individuals affected by ongoing investigations for which they were
responsible was particularly disappointing in comparison to their
colleagues on the Midyear investigative team who, based on the emails,
notes, memoranda, and other materials we reviewed, conducted themselves
with professionalism during a difficult and high-pressure
investigation.^[^110^](#fn110){#fnref110 .footnote-ref}^

We were cognizant of and considered these messages in reaching the
conclusions regarding the specific investigative decisions discussed
below. In particular, we were concerned about text messages exchanged by
Strzok and Page that potentially indicated or created the appearance
that investigative decisions were impacted by bias or improper
considerations. As we describe in Chapter Twelve, most of the text
messages raising such questions pertained to the Russia investigation.
Nonetheless, the implication in certain Russia-related text messages
that Strzok might be willing to take official action to impact
presidential candidate Trump's electoral prospects---for example, the
August 8, 2016 text exchange in which Page asked Strzok "Trump's not
ever going to become president, right? Right?!" and Strzok replied "No.
No he won't. We'll stop it"---caused us to question the earlier Midyear
investigative decisions in which he was involved, and whether he took
specific actions in the Midyear investigation based on his political
views.^[^111^](#fn111){#fnref111 .footnote-ref}^ As we describe in this
chapter, we found that Strzok was not the sole decisionmaker for any of
the specific investigative decisions examined in this chapter. We
further found evidence that in some instances Strzok and Page advocated
for more aggressive investigative measures than did others on the
Midyear team, such as the use of grand jury subpoenas and search
warrants to

obtain evidence.

There were clearly tensions and disagreements in a number of important
areas between Midyear agents and prosecutors. However, we did not find
documentary or testimonial evidence that improper considerations,
including political bias, directly affected the specific investigative
decisions discussed below, or that the justifications offered for these
decisions were pretextual. We recognize that these text and instant
messages cast a cloud over the FBI's handling of the Midyear
investigation and the investigation's credibility. But our review did
not find documentary or testimonial evidence that these political views
directly affected the specific investigative decisions that we reviewed
in this chapter. The broader impact of these text and instant messages,
including on such matters as the public perception of the FBI and the
Midyear investigation, are discussed in Chapter Twelve.

**A. Preference for Consent Rather than Compulsory Process to Obtain
Evidence**

At the outset we note that, contrary to public perception, the Midyear
team used compulsory process in the Midyear investigation. This included
grand jury subpoenas, search warrants, and 2703(d) orders. Nonetheless,
the Midyear prosecutors told us that they obtained evidence through
consent whenever possible. We found no evidence that the use of consent
to obtain evidence in the Midyear investigation was based on improper
considerations. The decisions regarding how to obtain particular pieces
of evidence were primarily made by the career prosecutors, for whom we
identified no evidence of political or other bias, and we found that the
reasons they provided for those decisions were not unreasonable.

The FBI investigators, attorneys, and supervisors involved with the
Midyear investigation---including individuals for whom we identified
electronic messages expressing political opinions---advocated for
greater use of compulsory process and for more aggressive investigative
methods, including the use of search warrants. However, the prosecutors
told us that they often chose consent over compulsory process or court
orders based on the following considerations: (1) avoiding delay that
could result from motions to quash subpoenas or search warrants; (2)
complying with Department policies; (3) protecting classified and other
sensitive information; (4) avoiding media leaks and public disclosures
that could harm the investigation; (5) the perceived obstacles to
establishing probable cause; and (6) the risk of improperly accessing
privileged information. We found these explanations to be supported by
Department and FBI policy and practice, and that the disputes between
the agents and the prosecutors about how aggressively to pursue certain
evidence were good faith disagreements.

It was not unreasonable for Department prosecutors to consider the delay
that could result from motions to quash subpoenas and search warrants.
Both Department and FBI witnesses told us that they hoped to complete
the investigation well in advance of the election, if possible, to avoid
influencing the political process. Indeed, Comey pressed in early May
for the prompt completion of the investigation. However, in seeking to
avoid delay, prosecutors were required to balance the need for timely
completion of an investigation against the need to ensure a thorough and
complete investigation. We did not identify bias or improper
considerations affecting that judgment call by the prosecutors.

Both Department and FBI policies generally support the use of consent
agreements to obtain evidence. The USAM advises prosecutors to consider
alternatives to grand jury subpoenas when practicable, such as obtaining
testimony and other evidence by consent, in light of the requirement
that the government maintain the secrecy of any testimony or evidence
accessed through the grand jury. USAM 9-11.254(1). Had the prosecutors
not used consent agreements to obtain most of the evidence in the
Midyear investigation, the FBI likely would not

have been able to be as transparent as it was in response to FOIA and
Congressional requests following the conclusion of the investigation.

The Attorney General's Guidelines for Domestic Operations (AGG-Dom) and
the FBI's Domestic Investigations and Operations Guide (DIOG) require
the FBI, when choosing among two or more operationally sound and
effective methods for obtaining evidence or intelligence, to strongly
consider using the one that is "least intrusive" with respect to "such
factors as the effect on the privacy and civil liberties of individuals
and potential damage to reputation." AGG-Dom § I.C.2; DIOG §§ 4.1.1,
4.4, 5.3, 18.2. The DIOG specifically identifies search warrants as a
method that is "very intrusive." DIOG § 4.4.3 The DIOG's guidance
regarding choosing the least intrusive method is emphasized in relation
to Sensitive Investigative Matters (SIMs), such as the Midyear
investigation. The DIOG states, "In the context of a SIM, particular
care should be taken when considering whether the planned course of
action is the least intrusive method if reasonable based upon the
circumstances of the investigation." DIOG § 10.1.3. Assessing which
investigative options to use, and whether various options are
operationally sound and effective, are judgment calls. Accordingly, the
Midyear team's use of consent agreements, after their evaluation of the
circumstances, was an approach to gathering evidence that complied with
Department policies. Likewise, had the prosecutors and agents agreed to
pursue a more aggressive course after evaluating the circumstances and
determining that it would have been a more effective method, it also
would have been a rational approach to gathering evidence.

Under FBI policy, it also was appropriate for the Midyear team to
consider how the use of compulsory process or more intrusive evidence
collection methods might result in the public disclosure of information
about the investigation--- particularly public disclosure that had the
potential to negatively impact the investigation. The DIOG states that
in deciding the least intrusive method necessary for effectively
obtaining information, the FBI should consider the "risk of public
exposure" and the potential that public exposure will be used to an
individual's "detriment and/or embarrassment." DIOG §§ 4.4.3(E), 5.3.
Witnesses told us that there is a need to be particularly cautious with
respect to the use of process in national security cases, due to the
risk of classified information being leaked.

It was, of course, proper for the prosecutors to consider whether they
could demonstrate probable cause before using criminal process. The
Fourth Amendment protects individuals from unlawful searches and
seizures of their property, and courts have held that individuals have
privacy interests in their electronic communications. *See Ross*, 456
U.S. at 822-23; *Riley*, 134 S. Ct. at 2485;
[*Trulock*](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)[,](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)
[275 F.3d at
403](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)[.](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)
Generally, the government must obtain a search warrant before searching
data contained in an individual's electronic storage devices, such as
computers and cellular telephones. *Id*.; *Riley*, 134 S. Ct. at 2485.
To obtain such a search warrant, the government must make a showing of
facts under oath demonstrating probable cause to believe that a device
to be searched contains evidence of a crime. *See* Fed. R. Crim. P. 41.
Both Department and FBI witnesses told us that, in some circumstances,
they were not certain they could make such a showing.

It was also proper for the prosecutors to consider privilege issues. By
law, prosecutors cannot use compulsory process to override privileges,
such as attorney-client or marital privilege. G.J. Manual § 5.1
(*quoting* *Branzburg*, 408 U.S. at 688); G.J. Manual §§ 5.6, 5.26.
While a filter team may be used to cull privileged material from seized
evidence before an investigative team reviews that evidence, there are
also Department policies that apply to seizing evidence that may contain
privileged information. For example, under USAM 9-13.410, prosecutors
can only issue a subpoena to an attorney for information or evidence
related to the representation of clients if the prosecutors first obtain
approval from the AAG or DAAG of the Criminal Division. The AAG or DAAG
will only provide such approval if the prosecutors make reasonable
efforts to first obtain the evidence through alternative sources,
including consent, unless such efforts would

compromise the investigation. USAM 9-13.410. Similarly, the DIOG
provides that, "It is less intrusive to obtain information from existing
government sources.or from publicly-available data in commercial data
bases, than to obtain the same information from a third party (usually
through legal process) that has a confidential relationship with the
subject." DIOG § 4.4.3(D).

We questioned why the Midyear team did not serve subpoenas on or seek to
obtain search warrants related to the last known persons to possess
devices that the team was never able to locate. These included Combetta
for the missing Archive Laptop and Clinton or her attorneys for
Clinton's handheld devices. Both FBI and Department witnesses told us
that they believed Combetta and Clinton's attorneys were being truthful
that they could not locate these devices and therefore subpoenas would
not have made a difference in these situations. This was a judgment call
made by the prosecutors and agents, and we did not identify evidence
that it was infected by bias or improper considerations.

We also found no evidence that the particular limitations contained in
the consent agreements were based on improper considerations or bias.
For example, the prosecutors told us that the scope of consent was often
limited to the time period of Clinton's tenure as Secretary of State,
because that is when she had access to classified information. Although
email communications among Clinton, her attorneys, and PRN staff
following Clinton's tenure may have been relevant to Clinton's
production of work-related emails to the State Department and the
subsequent deletions of emails her attorneys deemed personal, the
prosecutors told us that (1) most of these communications would have
been protected by attorneyclient privilege; and (2) the FBI obtained
communications between Clinton's staff, including her attorneys, and PRN
staff from PRN. In determining that these and other limitations in the
consent agreements were not unreasonable, we considered the Department
and FBI policies cited above.

B. Decisions Not to Obtain or Seek to Review Certain Evidence
-------------------------------------------------------------

The Midyear team did not obtain or review some evidence that we found
might have been useful to the investigation. The team's reasons for not
doing so appear to have been based on limitations they imposed on the
scope of their investigation, the desire to complete the investigation
well before the election, and their belief that the foregone evidence
was likely of limited value. Those reasons were, in part, in tension
with Comey's reaction and response in October 2016 to the discovery of
emails between Clinton and Abedin on the Weiner laptop. However,

we found no evidence that the decisions not to obtain this evidence were
based on improper considerations or bias. We concluded that these were
judgment calls made by the prosecutors and agents.

We asked members of the Midyear team why they did not seek to obtain the
personal devices that Clinton's senior aides used during their tenure at
the State Department, given that these devices were both (1) potential
sources of Clinton's work-related or classified emails; and (2)
unauthorized locations where classified emails were potentially being
stored. In addition, we inquired about the decision not to obtain Huma
Abedin's personal devices given (1) that she stated during her interview
that she had given them to her attorneys for production of her
workrelated emails to the State Department; and (2) the decision to seek
a search warrant in October 2016 in order to search the Weiner laptop.
Witnesses also told us they believed there was a flaw in the culling
process that resulted in the exclusion of most of Abedin's
clintonemail.com emails from the State Department production.

We found that the FBI team and the prosecutors decided together to
generally limit the devices they sought to those that either belonged to
Clinton or were used to back-up or cull Clinton's emails. The team
provided, among others, the following reasons for placing this
limitation on the scope of the investigation:

\(1) the culture of mishandling classified information at the State
Department which made the quantity of potential sources of evidence
particularly vast; (2) the belief that Clinton's own devices and the
laptops used to cull her emails were the most likely places to find the
complete collection of her emails from her tenure as Secretary of State;
and (3) the belief that the State Department was the better entity to
conduct a "spill investigation." With respect to the first rationale, we
note that it fails to acknowledge that the team was not required to take
an all-or-nothing approach. For example, a middle ground existed where
those devices belonging to Clinton's three top aides---which the team
determined accounted for approximately 68 percent of Clinton's email
exchanges---would have been reviewed, but devices belonging to other
State Department employees would not.

Regarding Abedin's devices, witnesses told us that Abedin played largely
an administrative role on Clinton's staff and, as such, they did not
believe her emails were likely to be significant to the investigation.
Yet, as referenced above, this view was in tension with Comey's approach
in late October 2016, discussed in detail in Chapters Nine and Ten.
Comey described the discovery on the Weiner laptop in October as being
the potentially "golden emails" based on what we concluded was very
little information about the possible contents of the emails---a stark
contrast to the Midyear team's assessment that the potential emails on
Abedin's devices, including exchanges with Clinton, were unlikely to be
significant. The team distinguished their approach with the Weiner
laptop based mostly on the fact that it happened to be in the
government's possession.

We recognize that reasonable minds differ on investigative approaches.
We concluded that, in deciding not to seek the devices of Clinton's top
aides, the Midyear team members weighed what they believed to be the
limited evidentiary value of the senior aides' devices against their
concerns about how pursuing them would add time to and increase the
scope of the investigation. Ultimately, Department prosecutors have
discretion with respect to "when, whom, how and even whether to
prosecute for apparent violations of federal criminal law," provided
that discretion is exercised without reliance on improper
considerations, such as political bias or concerns for personal gain,
and otherwise consistent with their oath of office and Department
policy. *See* USAM 9-27.110 (comment) (*citing* U.S. Const. Art. II § 3;
*United States* v. *LaBonte,* 520 U.S. 751, 762 (1997); *Nader* v.
*Saxbe*, 497 F.2d 676, 679 n. 18 (D.C. Cir. 1974); *Oyler* v. *Boles*,
368 U.S. 448 (1962); *United States* v. *Fokker Servs. B.V.,* 818 F.3d
733, 741 (D.C. Cir.

2016); *Newman* v. *United States*, 382 F.2d 479 (D.C. Cir. 1967);
*Powell* v. *Ratzenbach*, 359 F.2d 234 (D.C. Cir. 1965)); 5 U.S.C. §
3331 (oath of office). We did not find evidence that the decisions not
to obtain the senior aides' devices were based on improper
considerations, nor did we find that the reasons provided were a pretext
for improper considerations. We also did not find that the decisions
regarding the scoping of the investigation were inconsistent with any
Department polices. Accordingly, these were judgment calls that were
within the discretion of the Midyear agents and prosecutors to make.

In addition, as we describe in the classified appendix to this report,
the OIG learned near the end of our review that the FBI had considered
obtaining permission from the Department to review certain classified
materials that may have included information potentially relevant to the
Midyear investigation. Although the Midyear team drafted a memorandum to
the Deputy Attorney General in late May 2016 stating that review of the
highly classified materials was necessary to complete the investigation
and requesting permission to access them, the FBI never sent this
request to the Department. FBI witnesses told us that they did not seek
access to these classified materials for various reasons, including that
they believed this information would not materially impact the
conclusion. The classified appendix describes in more detail the highly
classified information, its potential relevance to the Midyear
investigation, the FBI's reasons for not seeking access to it, and our
analysis.

C.  **Voluntary Interviews**

The Midyear investigation did not use the grand jury for the purpose of
collecting testimony from witnesses. FBI and Department witnesses told
us that through voluntary interviews they were able to establish better
rapport with witnesses and avoid risks associated with exposing grand
jurors to classified information. We found no evidence that the use of
voluntary interviews instead of grand jury testimony was based on
improper considerations or influenced by bias. Rather, we concluded that
these were judgment calls made by the prosecutors and agents.

As with the use of consent to obtain documentary and physical evidence,
the use of voluntary interviews instead of grand jury testimony was
consistent with the DIOG's preference for the "least intrusive" method.
In addition, due to grand jury secrecy the use of voluntary interviews
contributed to the FBI's ability to be transparent in response to FOIA
requests and Congressional inquiries. The preference for voluntary
interviews also was consistent with Department policy regarding the use
of classified information before the grand jury. Before classified
information can be utilized before the grand jury, the USAM requires
prosecutors to seek approval from the agency responsible for classifying
the information. USAM 990.230. Witnesses told us that this can be a
lengthy process. In addition, the USAM cautions that questioning grand
jury witnesses regarding classified information poses a risk that the
witness will disclose more classified information than expected or
permitted. *Id*. Even if the Midyear team could have obtained the
necessary approvals to use classified information in the grand jury, the
prosecutors told us that there are concerns with exposing grand jurors
to classified information---the more individuals that are exposed to
classified information, the greater the risk of compromise.

The Midyear prosecutors told us they kept open the possibility of
subpoenaing witnesses before the grand jury, especially witnesses like
Paul Combetta, whose testimony would not likely require the disclosure
of classified information. The Midyear team subpoenaed Combetta to
appear before the grand jury. However, Department prosecutors and FBI
agents ultimately decided that questioning him before the grand jury was
unnecessary because (1) they perceived him to be credible during his
third interview; and (2) he did not implicate anyone else in criminal
conduct such that it would have been helpful to "lock in" his testimony
for a future trial. We did not find evidence that this decision was
motivated by an improper consideration.

C.  **Use Immunity Agreements**

Prosecutors have wide latitude in deciding to whom to give immunity, and
the Department entered into "letter use" or "Queen for a Day" immunity
agreements with three witnesses in the Midyear investigation: Pagliano,
Combetta, and Bentel. We found no evidence that the decisions to enter
into these immunity agreements were based on improper considerations.
The factors that the Midyear prosecutors told us they considered in
deciding to grant immunity were consistent with the factors Department
policy required them to consider, including:

C.  - "The value of the person's testimony or information to the
        investigation or prosecution;"
    - "The person's relative culpability in connection with the
        offense or offenses being investigated or prosecuted;" and
    - "The possibility of successfully prosecuting the person prior to
        compelling his or her testimony." *See* USAM 9-23.210.

With respect to Pagliano, the prosecutors told us that they entered into
a letter use immunity agreement because they believed the information he
could provide regarding the set-up and maintenance of Clinton's servers
was critical to the Midyear investigation and they determined that he
faced no criminal exposure. Based on a review of his FD-302s (as
described in Section VII.A of this chapter) and the fact that PIN
considered and declined criminal charges against Pagliano, we found that
the prosecutors' assessments regarding Pagliano were not unreasonable or
motivated by improper considerations or bias.

With respect to Bentel, the only immunity agreement was a Queen for a
Day proffer agreement. This agreement prevented the Department from
using any statements made by Bentel pursuant to the agreement against
him in its case-inchief in any subsequent prosecution, but did not
prevent the Department from using leads obtained from Bentel's
statements or using Bentel's statements to cross-examine him in any
future prosecution. *See* Chapter Two, Section I.E.3. The prosecutors
assessed that interviewing Bentel was a necessary investigative step,
and that he faced no criminal exposure. Based on our review of Bentel's
FD-302 and the limited nature of the Queen for a Day immunity agreement,
we found that the prosecutors' decision to grant Bentel immunity was not
unreasonable or based on improper considerations or bias.

With respect to Combetta, we found his actions in deleting Clinton's
emails in violation of a Congressional subpoena and preservation order
and then lying about it to the FBI to be particularly serious. We asked
the prosecutors why they chose to grant him immunity instead of charging
him with obstruction of justice, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1505, or
making false statements, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001.

Department policy provides that, when considering whether to pursue
criminal charges against an individual:

The attorney for the government should commence or recommend federal
prosecution if he/she believes that the person's conduct constitutes a
federal offense, and that the admissible evidence will probably be
sufficient to obtain and sustain a conviction, unless (1) the
prosecution would serve no substantial federal interest; (2) the person
is subject to effective prosecution in another jurisdiction; or (3)
there exists an adequate non-criminal alternative to prosecution.

USAM 9-27.220. In determining whether the prosecution would serve a
federal interest, the Department should "weigh all relevant
considerations," including:

- "The nature and seriousness of the offense;"
- "The person's culpability in connection with the offense;" and
- "The person's willingness to cooperate in the investigation or
    prosecution of others."

USAM 9-27.230.

We received mixed testimony from Department and FBI witnesses regarding
the strength of the evidence that Combetta committed obstruction or made
false statements following his first two interviews. The prosecutors and
agents we interviewed indicated that, even assuming that "the admissible
evidence was probably.sufficient to obtain and sustain a
conviction" after Combetta's first two interviews---an assumption the
prosecutors indicated was not necessarily true---they believed
prosecuting Combetta would not "serve a federal interest." The reasons
they provided to us for reaching this conclusion included: (1) relevant
to the nature and seriousness of the offense, there was no evidence that
Combetta knew anything about the content of the emails on Clinton's
server or that they were classified when he deleted them; (2) relevant
to Combetta's culpability, they believed Combetta's failure to be
forthcoming had been primarily due to poor representation rather than a
motive to mislead the investigators; and (3) relevant to his willingness
to cooperate, Combetta was willing to cooperate with immunity.
Prosecutor 1 told us that the team would have considered pursuing
charges against Combetta if he refused to cooperate with immunity, but
that granting immunity was "the most expedient way" to obtain truthful
information from him.

The prosecutors told us they believed granting Combetta use immunity was
the best available option. They told us that they could not forgo
Combetta's testimony, because they believed his truthful testimony
regarding his role and the roles of others in the March deletions was
essential to the investigation. Moreover, they said they had no means
other than immunity to gain his testimony, because he had stated that he
would invoke his Fifth Amendment privilege against selfincrimination.
The prosecutors told us they did not charge Combetta and then pursue his
cooperation in exchange for a guilty plea to reduced charges or a
sentencing reduction because of, as discussed above, concerns about the
strength of the admissible evidence and because they did not believe
criminal charges were in the federal interest given his willingness to
cooperate with immunity. The decision to choose a use immunity agreement
over a non-prosecution agreement is supported by the USAM, which
provides that immunity is (1) appropriate when "the testimony or other
information that is expected to be obtained from the witness may be
necessary to the public interest;" and (2) preferable to a
nonprosecution agreement in exchange for cooperation because immunity
"at least leaves open the possibility of prosecuting the witness
on the basis of independently obtained evidence." USAM 9-23.210;
9-27.600 (comment).

We did not find evidence that the judgments made by the prosecutors in
entering into these immunity agreements were inconsistent with
Department policy, or based on improper considerations or bias.
Ultimately, assessing the strength of the evidence and applying the
provisions of the U.S. Attorney's Manual in determining whether to
pursue federal criminal charges is a matter within the discretion and
judgment of the prosecutors.

**E. Mills and Samuelson**

The issues surrounding obtaining Mills's and Samuelson's testimony
regarding the culling process and searching the culling laptops consumed
a significant amount of the Midyear team's time and attention and caused
significant strife between the FBI and Department prosecutors. Several
members of the FBI Midyear team, including Comey, expressed concerns
that the prosecutors had not been sufficiently aggressive. Ultimately,
Mills and Samuelson submitted to voluntary interviews---albeit with
limitations that prevented the investigators from soliciting privileged
information---and the laptops were secured through consent agreements
and act-of-production immunity. Both the prosecutors and the FBI told us
that the team obtained what it needed from Mills and Samuelson to
conduct a thorough investigation. Comey himself, during a speech at an
October 2016 FBI conference for Special Agents in Charge, which we
describe below in Chapter Eight, acknowledged the complex issues
involved with obtaining the culling laptops from Mills and Samuelson. He
further stated that the decision to obtain the culling laptops by
consent was "reasonable.to short circuit the months and months of
litigation that would\'ve come otherwise" and that he was "actually
surprised they agreed to give us the laptops."

We noted that these decisions concerning the laptops were occurring at a
time when Comey and the Midyear team had already concluded that there
was likely no prosecutable case and believed it was unlikely the culling
laptops would change the outcome of the investigation. Moreover, as we
describe in Chapter Six, at the time of the deliberations regarding the
Mills and Samuelson issues, Comey was motivated by a desire to
"credibly" complete the investigation sufficiently in advance of the
election to not be perceived as political. Consistent with this
motivation, Comey told us that one of the reasons he raised the
possibility of a Special Counsel with Yates in April 2016 was to push
the Department to move more quickly to obtain the culling laptops. Comey
also pressed the Midyear investigators in early May for the prompt
completion of the investigation.

The Mills and Samuelson issues were somewhat complicated. Not only were
Mills and Samuelson both fact witnesses, Mills had numerous classified
emails pass through her unclassified government and personal email
addresses while working at the State Department under Secretary Clinton;
both Mills and Samuelson acted as attorneys for Clinton after they
departed from the State Department; and both were represented by their
own (and the same) counsel, Beth Wilkinson, while former Secretary
Clinton was represented by separate counsel, David Kendall, in
connection with the Midyear investigation. These different layers of
conduct and representation made obtaining evidence from Mills and
Samuelson complex, whether the prosecutors sought to obtain the evidence
by consent or compulsory process. In seeking evidence by consent, they
had to consider whose consent was necessary---Wilkinsons's on behalf of
Mills and Samuelson, Kendall's on behalf of Clinton, or both. They had
to be cognizant of attorney-client privilege and attorney-work product
with respect to Mills's and Samuelson's relationship to Clinton,
Kendall's relationship to Clinton, Wilkinson's relationship to Mills and
Samuelson, and information on the laptops related to Mills's and
Samuelson's representation of other clients. They had to consider the
implications of the fact that Wilkinson represented both Mills and
Samuelson, as well as two other witnesses in the Midyear investigation.
They also had to consider the policy restrictions set forth in the USAM,
ethical issues, strategic issues (such as whether issuing criminal
process might jeopardize the testimony that Mills consented to provide
regarding her tenure at the State Department), and the concern that
using criminal process could delay the investigation. Based on the
evidence we reviewed, the Department prosecutors extensively considered
all of these issues, analyzed the relevant law and policy, and
ultimately made judgment calls with respect to Mills and Samuelson that
were within their exercise of prosecutorial discretion and we found were
not unreasonable.

We likewise found no evidence that bias impacted the decision to obtain
testimony and evidence from Mills and Samuelson by consent agreement and
with act-of-production immunity. Indeed, individuals for whom we had
concerns about potential bias due to the content of their electronic
messages advocated for the use of aggressive investigative measures with
respect to Mills and Samuelson. For example, Strzok and Page both urged
the Department to issue grand jury subpoenas for Mills's and Samuelson's
testimony regarding the culling process and to seek a search warrant to
seize the culling laptops from Wilkinson's office.

The prosecutors told us that they followed the procedures set forth in
Department policy for obtaining testimony and evidence from attorneys
related to their representation of clients. Based on our review of the
relevant Department policy and privilege law, we found that the
prosecutors' interpretations of the relevant Department policy were not
unreasonable and we found no evidence that they were motivated by
improper considerations. In accordance with 28 C.F.R. § 59.4, USAM
9-19.220, and USAM 9-13.420, the prosecutors correctly determined that,
in the absence of evidence that such efforts would compromise the

investigation, they could not seek a search warrant to seize the culling
laptops from Wilkinson's office without first attempting to obtain the
culling laptops through consent and, if that was unsuccessful, a grand
jury subpoena. Under the circumstances, and in accordance with USAM
9-13.410, they determined that they could not issue a subpoena for the
culling laptops without first taking several preliminary steps,
including: (1) assessing whether the laptops were reasonably needed for
the successful completion of the investigation, (2) attempting to first
obtain the laptops by consent, and (3) seeking approval from the AAG or
DAAG of the Criminal Division. Also in accordance with USAM 9-13.410,
they determined that they could not issue subpoenas for Mills's and
Samuelson's testimony regarding the culling process without first
seeking their testimony by consent and tailoring their questions such
that they did not seek information that was "protected by a valid claim
of privilege."

In accordance with these policies, the prosecutors conducted voluntary
interviews with Mills and Samuelson, obtained Criminal Division approval
to issue subpoenas for the culling laptops, and ultimately obtained the
culling laptops through consent agreements and act-of-production
immunity agreements rather than subpoena. They told us that, even with
the approval for subpoenas, they believed securing the laptops through
consent was preferable to avoid the uncertainty and delays of a
potential motion to quash the subpoenas. The act-ofproduction immunity
agreements prevented the Department from using information obtained from
the laptops in a criminal prosecution against Mills or Samuelson for
violations of 18 U.S.C. §§ 793(e) and (f) (felony mishandling of
classified information), 18 U.S.C. § 1924 (misdemeanor mishandling of
classified information), and 18 U.S.C. § 2071 (destruction of federal
records). The immunity agreements did not prevent the Department from:
(1) using information obtained from the laptops to prosecute Mills or
Samuelson for other crimes, such as obstructing a Congressional or FBI
investigation or lying to federal investigators;

\(2) using evidence obtained from other sources, including their
voluntary interviews, to prosecute Mills and Samuelson for mishandling
classified information, destroying federal records, or any other
offenses; (3) using information obtained from the laptops to prosecute
other individuals, including Clinton, for mishandling classified
information, destroying federal records, or any other offenses; or (4)
using leads developed as a result of the FBI's review of the information
on the culling laptops.

Ultimately, these decisions were judgment calls made by, and within the
discretion of, the prosecutors, much like the decisions discussed above
regarding use immunity agreements. We found no evidence that these
decisions were the result of improper considerations or were influenced
by bias.

**F. Handling of Clinton's Interview**

By the time of Clinton's interview on July 2, we found that the Midyear
agents and prosecutors, along with Comey, had decided that absent a
confession or false statements by Clinton, the investigation would be
closed without charges. We further found that this conclusion was based
on the prosecutors' view that there was insufficient evidence of
Clinton's knowledge and intent to support criminal charges, which we
discuss in detail in Chapter Seven.

We did not find evidence that decisions regarding the timing or scoping
of Clinton's interview were based on improper considerations or
influenced by bias. In addition, based on our review of the FD-302 and
contemporaneous notes, the investigators appeared to ask appropriate
questions of Clinton and made use of documents to challenge Clinton's
testimony and assess her credibility during the
interview.^[^112^](#fn112){#fnref112 .footnote-ref}^ However, we had
three primary concerns related to the Clinton interview: (1) text
messages sent by Page to Strzok, McCabe, and another FBI employee that
appeared to suggest that the team limit the number of attendees at
Clinton's interview because she might be the next President and it could
leave her upset at the FBI; (2) certain instant messages sent by Agent
1, who was one of the case agents that handled Clinton's interview; and
(3) the presence of Mills and Samuelson at Clinton's interview, despite
that they were also witnesses in the investigation.

With regard to the number of attendees, Page sent the following text
message in support of fewer agents and prosecutors attending Clinton's
interview: "She might be our next president. The last thing you need
us going in there loaded for bear. You think she's going to remember or
care that it was more doj than fbi?"^[^113^](#fn113){#fnref113
.footnote-ref}^ The text messages and contemporaneous emails reflect
that Page was particularly concerned with the Department's request that
four prosecutors attend the interview. Ultimately, eight people attended
Clinton's interview from the Department and FBI, including five
prosecutors. Therefore, we concluded that Page's suggestion of limiting
the number of attendees to four or six did not in fact occur. Moreover,
based on witness testimony, we found that the approach Page was
advocating---keeping the number of interviewers down to a lower
number---was consistent with legitimate investigative strategy.

Nevertheless, we found that Page's statement, on its face, consisted of
a recommendation that the Midyear team consider how Clinton would treat
the FBI if she were to become President in deciding how to handle
Clinton's interview. Suggesting that investigative decisions be based on
this consideration was inappropriate and created an appearance of bias.

We also were concerned that Agent 1 was one of the two agents who
questioned Clinton during the interview given certain instant messages
that we identified from Agent 1, including some that expressed support
for Clinton and hostility toward Trump. We interviewed each of the seven
other FBI and

Department attendees at Clinton's interview, and none of them expressed
concerns regarding the conduct of the interview. We also did not find,
based on our review of the interview outline prepared in advance of the
interview as well as the FD-302 and contemporaneous notes of the
interview, evidence that bias or improper considerations influenced the
conduct of the interview. We took note of the fact that, because the
Midyear team and Comey had concluded prior to the interview that the
evidence did not support criminal charges (absent a confession or false
statement by Clinton during the interview), the interview had little
effect on the outcome of the investigation. Nonetheless, as discussed
above, we found Agent 1's messages to be troubling and in Chapter
Twelve, we discuss the impact of these instant messages on such matters
as the public perception of the handling of the Midyear investigation
and the FBI.

Finally, we questioned why the Department and FBI allowed Mills and
Samuelson, two percipient witnesses (one of whom, Mills, herself had
classified information transit through her unclassified personal email
account) attend Clinton's interview, even if they had also both served
as lawyers for Clinton after they left the State Department. The FBI and
Department employees we interviewed all agreed that the attendance of
Mills and Samuelson at Clinton's interview posed potential evidentiary
problems, was unusual, and was unhelpful from an "optics" perspective.
Witnesses also told us that the only way they could have excluded Mills
and Samuelson was by subpoenaing Clinton before the grand jury, but that
the team did not seriously consider that option. If the team had issued
a grand jury subpoena, Clinton either would have been required to
testify before the grand jury without her attorneys in the room or she
might have agreed to a voluntary interview outside the presence of Mills
and Samuelson to avoid having to appear before the grand jury, given
that a grand jury appearance would have delayed the investigation.

We did not find evidence that bias played a role in the decision to
proceed with the Clinton interview with Mills and Samuelson in
attendance. Rather, we concluded that it was largely based on four
factors. First, the Midyear prosecutors were concerned about
interviewing Clinton before the grand jury because of the challenges of
presenting classified information before the grand jury. Second, the
Midyear team had decided by the time of Clinton's interview that the
case was headed toward a declination absent a confession or false
statement by Clinton. Third, had Clinton been required to testify before
the grand jury, the FBI would not have been able to participate in the
interview. Fourth, the team planned to pause the interview and conduct a
sidebar with Kendall if Mills or Samuelson interfered during the
interview.

Ultimately, witnesses told us that Mills and Samuelson did not
interfere, object, or speak substantively during the interview.
Moreover, Clinton's interview did not result in any change in the
conclusion of the Midyear team and Comey that a declination decision was
warranted. Accordingly, we found no persuasive evidence that Mills's or
Samuelson's presence influenced Clinton's interview, or that the outcome
of the investigation would have been different had Clinton been
subpoenaed before the grand jury.

Nevertheless, we found the decision to allow the Clinton interview to
proceed in the presence of two fact witnesses, who also were serving as
Clinton's counsel, was inconsistent with typical investigative strategy
and gave rise to accusations of bias and preferential
treatment.^[^114^](#fn114){#fnref114 .footnote-ref}^ Moreover, there are
serious potential ramifications when one witness attends another
witness's interview. The Midyear team could have developed information
during the Clinton interview that led the team to reconsider its
conclusion that the investigation was headed towards a declination, or
led the team to believe that Clinton made a false statement during the
interview. In either case, the presence of two fact witnesses at the
interview could have negatively impacted subsequent FBI investigative
efforts or a subsequent trial. We believe that it would have been useful
for the Midyear team to have had guidance to consider in this situation.
Thus, we recommend that the Department and the FBI consider developing
guidance consider developing practice guidance that would assist
investigators and prosecutors in identifying the general risks with and
alternatives to permitting a witness to attend a voluntary interview of
another witness, in particular when the witness is serving as counsel
for the other witness.

**CHAPTER SIX: "ENDGAME" DISCUSSIONS AND FORMER DIRECTOR COMEY'S PUBLIC
STATEMENT**

Our review found that the Midyear team concluded beginning in early 2016
that evidence supporting a prosecution of former Secretary Clinton or
her senior aides was likely lacking. This conclusion was based on the
fact that the Midyear team had not found evidence that former Secretary
Clinton or her senior aides knowingly transmitted classified information
on unclassified systems because (1) classified information exchanged in
unclassified emails was not clearly or properly marked, and (2) State
Department staff introducing classified information into emails made an
effort to "talk around" it. Although the Midyear team continued its
investigation, taking the investigative steps described in Chapter Five
and looking for evidence that could change their assessment, they also
began discussing what witnesses referred to as the "endgame" for the
investigation---ways for the Department and FBI to credibly announce the
closing of the investigation.

In this chapter, we discuss the factors that led the Midyear team to
conclude that the investigation likely would result in a declination. We
then describe the discussions among Comey, Rybicki, Yates, and Axelrod
beginning in April 2016 about how to announce the closing of the Midyear
investigation, including Comey's mention of a special counsel and
Lynch's knowledge of these discussions. We also describe the origins of
Comey's decision to hold a press conference without coordinating with or
informing the Department in advance, the various drafts of his public
statement, and the Department's reactions to the statement after he
delivered it on July 5, 2016. In addition, we describe the tarmac
meeting between Lynch and former President Bill Clinton on June 27,
2016, and its impact on the Midyear investigation. Finally, we describe
Comey's congressional testimony about the reasons for his public
statement.

**I. Evidence that the Case Was Headed toward a Declination**

As described above, both Department and FBI witnesses said that the
central question in the Midyear investigation was whether there was
evidence that former Secretary Clinton and her aides acted with
knowledge that the information transmitted was classified or transmitted
with criminal intent. Various witnesses told the OIG that the
investigation focused on identifying what classified information
transited former Secretary Clinton's server, who introduced it, and why.
The investigative team looked for evidence that individuals who sent
emails containing classified information did so with knowledge that the
information was classified---for example, took information from
documents that were marked with classification headers and stripped off
the header information---or that former Secretary Clinton's private
server was set up to circumvent classification requirements.

From early in the investigation, the investigative team said they knew
that proving intent would be a challenge.^[^115^](#fn115){#fnref115
.footnote-ref}^ Prosecutor 1 told the OIG:

This whole case turned on mens rea guilty state of mind..
I've run a lot of mishandling cases. The issue is usually that people
are taking things home or they're communicating them to someone for, to
set up a business outside or to do something that's like, what we don't
tend to prosecute criminally anyway are people who are communicating
things for work purposes.. Usually to people who are already cleared.
So, those are the kinds of things that when we're talking about mens
rea, were sort of instructive for us..

This prosecutor explained that Secretary Clinton and her staff did not
display any of the counterintelligence indicators that prosecutors
typically see in mishandling cases, such as unreported foreign contacts
or "weird" meetings with foreigners. This prosecutor said that evidence
of intent was lacking for other reasons as well, including that numerous
witnesses testified that the State Department had terrible information
technology (IT) systems and that its remote email system did not work
when employees were traveling and sending emails in different time
zones. As a result, the investigative team said they could not infer bad
intent from the use of personal email accounts as they might in other
cases.

Prosecutor 2 similarly stated that mishandling cases generally involve
"people who have an intent to give classified information to others,
people who have an intent to.take documents home and.do nefarious
things with them, or sometimes hoarders of classified information." This
prosecutor told the OIG that, unlike the typical mishandling case, the
State Department employees who introduced classified information into
the unclassified system were trying to "talk around" it in the course of
doing their jobs. This prosecutor stated, "And looking in terms of some
of the times when the classified information appeared on
unclassified systems in this case, we see, we see problems, you
know, late at night, weekends, the time between Christmas and New Year's
when no one is in the office."

FBI officials agreed with the prosecutors that the need to prove intent
was problematic from the outset. In his recent book, Comey stated:

.Hillary Clinton's case, at least as far as we knew at the start, did
not appear to come anywhere near General Petraeus's in the volume and
classification level of the information mishandled. Although she seemed
to be using an unclassified system for some classified topics, everyone
she emailed appeared to have both the appropriate clearance and a
legitimate need to know the information. So although we were not going
to prejudge the result, we started the Clinton investigation aware that
it was unlikely to be a case that career prosecutors at the Department
of Justice would prosecute. That might change, of course, if we could
find a smoking-gun email where someone in government told Secretary
Clinton not to do what she was doing, or if we could prove she
obstructed justice, or if she, like Petraeus, lied to us in an
interview. It would all turn on what we could prove beyond a reasonable
doubt.^[^116^](#fn116){#fnref116 .footnote-ref}^

As described in more detail below, Comey said that by early May 2016,
when he wrote the first draft of his public statement, the Midyear team
was aware that evidence of intent was lacking.

Others on the Midyear team agreed. FBI Attorney 1 stated, "I have cases
where there are people with thousands of classified documents in
their home and we don't prosecute them.. This is not something we
prosecute lightly or we do regularly. There needs to be, usually, some
either nefarious intent or some.actual harm that has happened because
of it." Agent 2 told the OIG:

From like my level looking at it.you were hard-pressed to find
the intent of anyone to put classified information on that server. And
again, sloppy security practices, for sure. Right? But, and, and
preventable? Yes. But somebody intentionally putting classified on it,
we just never found clear-cut evidence of somebody intending to do that.

As early as September 2015, FBI and Department officials realized that
they were unlikely to find evidence of intent. Prosecutor 2 stated that
within a month of first obtaining criminal process, they had seen no
evidence of intent. This prosecutor told the OIG that the team realized
that the case likely would lead to a declination after they had reviewed
the classified information in former Secretary Clinton's emails and
heard the explanations for including that information in unclassified
emails. Prosecutor 2 said that there were a number of other
investigative steps they needed to take to complete their due diligence,
but that by September 2015 they knew that they would need a "game
changer" to be able to prove intent.

Notes obtained by the OIG from a meeting between Toscas and then EAD
John Giacalone on December 4, 2015, confirm that the lack of intent was
the subject of ongoing discussions. According to the notes, Giacalone
asked the team, "Still do not have much on the intent side, right?"
The notes show that the team members present at the meeting agreed with
him. Giacalone, who retired from the FBI in February 2016, said that
there were "no smoking guns" showing intent when he left.

Similarly, other notes show that prosecutors met with NSD supervisors on
January 29, 2016, to discuss the lack of evidence supporting
prosecution. The notes state:

Don't see prosecutable case at this point.

A lot of stuff done from Ops Center lower level State Department
staff ---\> up. HRC is receiving.

Want to insulate DOJ from criticism about how we did this work.

No daylight between FBI management and investigative team agents re:
view of criminal liability.

Asked what led the team to conclude by January 2016 that there would not
be a prosecutable case, Laufman said that there was not a fixed point in
time or organized discussion that produced this realization. He said
that every time the team concluded "another consequential investigative
step, and no additional information emerged that.pointed in the
direction of potential criminal liability, then the...foundation of
facts emerged that was not likely to support a recommendation to
charge."

Asked whether there was a particular piece of evidence or an interview
that led to the realization that the case would result in a declination,
Prosecutor 3 stated that it became apparent once the team had
interviewed all of former Secretary Clinton's senior staff members,
including Jake Sullivan and Cheryl Mills, and heard the same explanation
for what they believed to be an innocuous transmission of emails
containing classified information. Other witnesses described the team's
realization that the investigation would not result in a prosecutable
case as

"iterative" or "emerging over time" based on the cumulative lack of
intent evidence over the course of the entire investigation. In any
event, various witnesses agreed that the team had come to the conclusion
that there likely was not a prosecutable case by the Spring of 2016.

Baker told the OIG that he thought that the conduct of former Secretary
Clinton and her senior aides was "appalling with respect to how they
handled the classified information.and arrogant in terms of their
knowledge and understanding of these matters." He stated that he was
concerned about former Secretary Clinton's level of knowledge and
intent, and thought that she should have recognized the sensitivity of
information in the emails sent to her. Baker said that he "debated and
argued" with Comey and the Midyear team about former Secretary Clinton's
criminal liability, but ultimately came to the conclusion that declining
prosecution was the correct decision after reviewing a binder of her
emails. Baker said that he recognized there was a lack of evidence
establishing knowledge or criminal intent, and that based on "the volume
of.communications coming at

Clinton at all times, day and night, given the heavy
responsibilities that a

Secretary of State has, isn't she entitled to rely on the
classification determinations by her folks?" Baker stated that he "did
not like it.. I eventually agreed with it, but I did not like it."

Yates told the OIG that she had been getting updates regularly from
Carlin and Toscas about where the investigation was going. In Spring
2016, Carlin or Toscas told her that if the investigation continued in
the same direction it was going, they expected that the prosecutors and
the agents would be recommending a declination. Yates told us that this
assessment of the case was based on evidence indicating that the people
transmitting classified information did not have a "bad purpose." She
pointed to a variety of factors, including that emails were sent by
State Department employees to other State Department employees, and
usually contained time-sensitive logistical information that former
Secretary Clinton needed to receive. She said that the information was
not marked classified, with the exception of three paragraphs that were
portion marked as "Confidential," and that there were even disputes
within the originating agencies as to whether the information should be
classified at all.

Yates said that Department leadership began talking internally in the
Spring of 2016 about how to convey a declination decision because they
knew that it would be controversial, and that they were all of the view
that it needed to be clear that the decision was supported by both the
FBI and the Department. Yates said that these discussions always
proceeded with the "great big caveat" that former Secretary Clinton
could lie during her interview, but that they could not wait until after
the interview to begin preparing for a declination due, in part, to the
proximity of the election. Discussions between the FBI and the
Department about the "endgame" for concluding the Midyear investigation
began around this same time, and are described in more detail below.

**II. Discussions between FBI and Department Leadership about How to
Credibly Announce a Declination (Spring 2016)**

As noted above, Comey said that the Midyear team was aware from the
outset that the investigation was unlikely to result in a prosecutable
case, absent a "smoking-gun" email. Comey told the OIG that he realized
sometime in March or April 2016 that the evidence obtained in the
Midyear investigation likely would not support a prosecution. Asked what
led him to that conclusion at that time, Comey stated:

The picture that was fairly clear at that point, was that
Hillary Clinton had used a private email.to conduct her State
Department business. And in the course of conduct of her State
Department business, she discussed classified topics on eight occasions
TS, dozens of occasions SECRET, and there was no indication that we had
found that she knew that was improper, unlawful, that someone had said
don't do that, that will violate 18 U.S.C. the federal criminal
code, but that there was no evidence of intent and it's looking,
despite the fact of the prominence of it, like an unusual, but in a way
fairly typical spill and that there was no fricking way that the
Department of Justice in a million years was going to prosecute that.

And because Counterintelligence Division of the FBI was involved in all
the other spill cases and it collected for me the history of them, no
way, there's no way, unless we find something else in May and June or we
get 18 U.S.C. § 1001 false statements handed to us during her
interview.

Comey said that, as he came to this realization, he became concerned
that the Department would be unable to announce the closing of the
investigation in a way that the public would find credible and
objective. Comey said he was concerned that having the Department's
political leadership announce a declination would expose it to a
"corrosive doubt about whether you did the investigation in a
credible way." He said that this concern "dominated his
thinking.for most of 2016, but especially from the spring on."
According to Comey, his concern was based on the appearance or
perception created by the Department's leadership declining prosecution
of the presumptive Democratic nominee, because they were political
appointees; it was not based on evidence that Lynch or Yates were
interfering in the investigation or were politically biased.

A. Initial Discussion between Comey and Yates in April 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------

**1. Options Discussed at the Meeting**

Comey said that beginning in March or April 2016, he began to think of
ways to announce a declination. Comey said that during this time he had
a meeting with Rybicki, Yates, and Axelrod to discuss how the FBI and
Department could credibly close the investigation. Based on Yates's
description of the circumstances of the meeting (described below) and
FBI emails, we determined that this meeting likely took place on
Tuesday, April 12, 2016.

According to Comey, he told Yates and Axelrod during the meeting that
they needed to begin thinking about the how to announce the end of the
investigation. Comey said that he told Yates, "My sense of this, and
I'm not done, but my sense of this is this is heading for a declination
and how do you credibly decline this? And what can you say to people to
support the credibility of the work that's been done?"

Comey said that he urged Yates and Axelrod to consider the most
transparent options available for announcing a declination. Comey told
the OIG:

My view was, still is, that the more information you are able to
supply, the higher the credibility of the investigation and the
conclusion. And that especially in a poisonous political atmosphere,
where all kinds of nonsense is said, the more you can fill that space
with actual facts, the more reliable, believable, credible the
conclusion is.

He stated, "People are still going to disagree. They are still going to
fight, but at least there will be facts in the public square that
show.we did this in a good way, thought about it in a good way
and here is our reasoning as to why we think there is no there there."

Comey told the OIG that they did not discuss or consider specific
options, but that he simply said to Yates, "You need to get smart
people working on what are the range of possibilities.what is
possible under the law, I remember mentioning the Privacy Act, what is
possible and what are the vehicles for transparency, what are the outer
boundaries.. I think I just teed up the issue and said, hope you will
get smart people thinking about this." Asked whether he was ever
involved in discussions about a joint appearance with Attorney General
Lynch, Comey said that he did not recall any discussions about that
option.

Yates recalled this discussion with Comey differently. Yates said that
she had a regular monthly meeting with Comey, and that the day before
one of these meetings, Axelrod received a call from Rybicki suggesting
that they meet to discuss how to conclude the case. She did not recall
precisely when this meeting took place or what had happened in the
investigation leading up to it, but she described the investigation at
that time as "wrapping up."

Yates said that the meeting took place in her office. She said that they
talked about the investigation and agreed that public confidence in its
resolution was important. She said that everyone was of the same view
that there was not a criminal case based on the evidence to date, and
that it was not going to be sufficient to announce the conclusion by
saying, "We looked at it.case closed." She said that the four of them
agreed that people needed to have confidence that there had been a
thorough look at the facts, and that a declination was the right

decision.

Yates told the OIG that any discussion about how to announce a
declination always proceeded with "great big caveat on it" that former
Secretary Clinton could lie during her interview. Yates stated, "This is
if things continue to go that way. Because you don't want to be like
planning the declination that you don't really know is a declination
yet. Because I mean, if she lied for example. There's about, that could
change things entirely if she wasn't truthful in the interview."

According to Yates, one of the options they considered was a written
memorandum released to the public, which would give some level of facts
about the investigation. Yates stated that they all agreed that if they
released a written memorandum, they also would need to hold a press
conference to allow them to "look the American people in the eye"
and say that there was not a criminal case, rather than "hiding behind a
behind a press release or a writing that.would not be sufficient
to convey the earnestness of that decision." She said that no one
committed to a decision at this meeting, but rather they were "thinking
out loud."

We asked Axelrod about these discussions between Yates and Comey. He
said they focused on whether the FBI would be part of any announcement
at the conclusion of the investigation. Axelrod said that they discussed
preparing a letterhead memorandum (LHM) that could at least be provided
to Congress, along with some form of a public announcement.

Axelrod said that one of the options they discussed was a joint
announcement involving Lynch and Comey. Axelrod told the OIG that "the
view from the Department was it would be important for the Bureau to be
part of that." He stated, "Comey hadn't committed to it but
was.comfortable with it being some sort of joint thing." Asked why he
thought it was important to have Comey participate in an announcement,
Axelrod said that it was important for the Department and the FBI to
display a "unified front.having both organizations together saying
the truth, which was this was done by the book and this was the result."

Axelrod said that they never discussed the idea of Comey being the one
to announce a declination because it was never raised, but that he was
"not sure that would have been rejected out of hand." He stated,
"There would have been some advantages to that having been
coordinated and planned that way. And some disadvantages, too..
The thing.that I knew that the Department felt strongly about was
that Bureau had to be part of that announcement."

Rybicki said that he did not recall any specific discussions, stating,
"I just remember all ideas sort of being, you know, people talking
about, you know, press conferences and, and, and ways of closing and
things like that. I don't remember specific conversations."

**2. Comey Mentions a Special Counsel at April Meeting with Yates**

*Comey's Testimony*

Comey told the OIG that during the April meeting with Yates and Axelrod,
he told Yates that the closer they got to the political conventions, the
more likely he would be to insist that a special counsel be appointed,
because there was no way the Department could credibly finish the
investigation once former Secretary Clinton was the Democratic Party
nominee. Comey said that his comment to Yates was motivated in part by
his frustration that it was taking the Midyear prosecutors too long to
obtain the Mills and Samuelson laptops (discussed above in Chapter
Five). He said that he emphasized to Yates that the team needed to
obtain the laptops to be able to finish the investigation. According to
Comey, Yates reacted to his comment about the possible need for a
special counsel with concern, and that he responded, "Look I'm not
saying we have to do it, but the deeper we get into this summer, the
more likely it's going to be that I'll feel that way. And I was saying
it in part to get them to just move---to move, to get us this thing
the laptops."

As part of this discussion, Comey said he recounted his experience when
he was the DAG appointing then U.S. Attorney Patrick Fitzgerald as the
special counsel to investigate the leak of the name of a covert CIA
operative, Valerie Plame.^[^117^](#fn117){#fnref117 .footnote-ref}^ He
said he explained to Yates that the investigation focused in part on
whether Karl Rove, then President George W. Bush's senior political
advisor, had leaked the information, and that he (Comey) was concerned
about the appearance of a conflict of interest between Rove and then
Attorney General John Ashcroft because Rove had managed one of
Ashcroft's Senate campaigns. He told the OIG that he mentioned this to
Yates because he saw similarities between the Plame leak case and the
Midyear investigation: namely, that in the Plame case there was no basis
to prosecute Rove, and he did not think the Bush Administration could
have announced a declination in a way that assured the public the
investigation was done objectively.

Comey said that his comment to Yates about appointing a special counsel
also was motivated by concerns about the appearance of political bias in
the Department. He said that these concerns were based on the overall
political environment---given then President Obama's comments about the
investigation, he did not think the Department leadership could credibly
complete the investigation without charges.^[^118^](#fn118){#fnref118
.footnote-ref}^

Comey said that he also was concerned about an issue specific to Lynch.
As discussed in more detail in the classified appendix to this report,
Comey told the OIG that the FBI had obtained highly classified
information in March 2016 that included allegations of partisan bias or
attempts to impede the Midyear investigation by Lynch. Numerous
witnesses we interviewed---including Comey--- said that the FBI assessed
that these allegations were not credible based on various factors,
including that some of the information was objectively false. For
example, the information also suggested that Comey was attempting to
influence the investigation by extending it to help Republicans win the
election, which witnesses said the FBI knew was not true. By mid-June
2016, the FBI had obtained no information corroborating the
Lynch-related allegations.

When asked about this information, Comey stated that he knew it was not
credible on its face because it was not consistent with his personal
experience with

Lynch. Comey stated, "I saw no, I'll say this again, I saw no reality of
Loretta Lynch interfering in this investigation." However, Comey said
that he became concerned that the information about Lynch would taint
the public's perception of the Midyear investigation if it leaked,
particularly after DCLeaks and Guccifer 2.0 began releasing hacked
emails in mid-June 2016.

Despite these concerns, Comey told the OIG that it did not occur to him
to request a special counsel in late 2015, after Lynch's instruction to
use the term "matter" or former President Obama's public comments about
the investigation (discussed in Chapter Four), because Comey was
satisfied with the nature and the quality of the investigation being
conducted by the FBI. Comey emphasized that the FBI had its "A team"
working on the investigation, and that he was closely involved to ensure
that the team was protected from political or other influence.

As we describe in more detail in the classified appendix, Yates and
Axelrod told us that the FBI mentioned this information to them sometime
in the Spring of 2016 and provided a defensive briefing on it on July
12, 2016.^[^119^](#fn119){#fnref119 .footnote-ref}^ Yates said that the
FBI told her that the information was not deemed credible and did not
show her the relevant documents. After being shown the documents in her
OIG interview, Yates expressed frustration and said that, had she been
informed that the FBI had concerns about the information, she would have
engaged Comey in discussions about the impact on the Midyear
investigation. The FBI also did not provide Lynch with a defensive
briefing about the information until August 2016, more than a month
after investigative activity in Midyear was concluded, and she also was
told that the information was not credible. Lynch said that until
Comey's public testimony in 2017, she was never told that the
information played a role in his unilateral decision to make a public
statement about the Midyear investigation or concerns about whether a
special counsel was necessary.

However, Comey said that he became increasingly concerned and began
thinking about the possible need for a special counsel when he realized
in March or April 2016 that the case likely would result in a
declination, and that the declination might not happen until after the
political conventions. He explained that the Department's leadership
could not credibly announce a declination around or after the nominating
convention, because "the confluence of a decision on a case and a key
political event" would cause "grievous" damage to the Department's and
the

FBI's reputation.^[^120^](#fn120){#fnref120 .footnote-ref}^

*Yates's and Axelrod's Testimony*

Yates told us that she recalled Comey raising the possibility of a
special counsel at the April meeting. She told the OIG that Comey
commented that they may need a special counsel to announce the closing
of the Midyear investigation if the investigation ran past the
convention and former Secretary Clinton was formally the Democratic
Party's nominee.^[^121^](#fn121){#fnref121 .footnote-ref}^ According to
Yates, Comey added that there was no reason to request a special counsel
because the investigation would be completed before the convention. She
said that she did not interpret Comey's comment as a line drawn in the
sand, but more of a "musing."

Yates characterized Comey's suggestion as a "weird thing" that he raised
"out of the blue," and said that she did not understand why the
convention was a bright line for him. She stated, "Because if you were
concerned about an appearance that Clinton is the Democratic nominee
and you have a Democratic Attorney General, well, you got that before
the convention. You've kind of had that for quite some time now." Yates
said that she may have mentioned to Comey that Clinton had been the
presumptive Democratic Party nominee for some time and that using the
convention as a dividing line seemed "really artificial."

Yates also said that she was taken aback by Comey's comments, because
the investigation had been going on for some time and he had never
mentioned the need for a special counsel. She said that his concern was
based on the perception created by a Democratic-appointed Attorney
General announcing that the Democratic Party's Presidential nominee
would not be prosecuted. Yates said that she understood that this was
"all for appearance reasons." She stated, "Jim Comey never, ever,
raised any concern about Attorney General Lynch having any kind of
actual conflict or even an appearance of a conflict before we got to the
tarmac. Never, ever. Nor did anyone else at the FBI ever raise any
concern about that that I'm aware of."

Asked whether Comey at any time raised concerns about the involvement of
Lynch in either the investigation or the announcement, Yates stated:

No.I mean, this is where, and when I am so emphatic about that it's
because I read articles and testimony later that frankly, shocked me.
Because I thought, this was not the only discussion that I had with
former Director Comey about how we would roll it out. And I thought.I
read and I have no way of knowing if this is true, but I think Director
Comey's testimony indicated that he had been thinking for quite some
time that he felt like he needed to go in alone in making the
announcement. And not only did I never hear that, I'm not aware of
anybody, I mean, maybe somebody else at DOJ had heard that and it never
made its way to me. But I'm not aware of anybody else at DOJ hearing
that.

In fact, that's just the opposite of what our discussions were. I would
have thought when.we're talking about a joint press conference, et
cetera, that if he harbored either (A), any reservations about whether
Attorney General Lynch had a conflict or appeared to have a conflict he
would have said something. I don't know how you have a discussion about
that and have those feelings and not say anything about it. And then
(B), if he was actually planning on doing it on his own I don't know how
he didn't tell me that.

Yates said that she would have expected Comey to discuss any concerns he
had about Lynch or the Department with her, and said that Comey had not
been shy or hesitant to give his opinion in discussions with her.
However, she said that Comey "kept FBI's information very tight," and
that she "sometimes.felt like she had to pry information out of
him."

Axelrod gave a similar account of Comey's mention of a special counsel.
He said that Comey was concerned with the dates of the national
political conventions, particularly the Democratic National Convention,
because he thought that it would not be tenable for the Department's
leadership to continue to oversee the investigation or announce a
declination once former Secretary Clinton was the Democratic Party's
nominee. Axelrod said that he perceived Comey's concern as "purely
calendar-driven." He told the OIG that he did not know if Comey
appreciated the way that the appointment of a special counsel would be
perceived by the outside world, or whether it was "some sort of gambit
to sort of say hey, if you guys don't pick up the pace, right, this is
going to get really ugly." Axelrod said that at the time he interpreted
the suggestion as Comey thinking through how to "navigate this in such a
way that it gets accepted by, again, not by everyone but at least by
some chunk of the public, the reasonable center, as having been done on
the level."

Rybicki told the OIG that he did not recall any discussions between
Comey and Yates about the need to appoint a special counsel.

**3. Lynch's Knowledge of the April Meeting**

Asked about her knowledge of the meeting between Yates and Comey, Lynch
said that Yates told her that she met with Comey, and that Comey
indicated that he was not sure there was a "there there" with respect to
the Midyear investigation. According to Lynch, Yates said that Comey
mentioned that he should be the one to make any announcement about the
resolution of the case, because this would be best for the independence
of the Department. Lynch said that Yates and she both thought that any
discussion about an announcement was "very premature."

Lynch said that she did not think about the option to have Comey make
any eventual announcement in terms of a "decision tree" because it was
so premature. She stated that she was not aware of any other options
that Comey and Yates discussed, but that she did not see a basis for the
Department to "have the investigative arm announce a prosecutive
decision." Asked whether there was anything about the case that in her
view would warrant deviating from the standard practice of having
prosecutors announcing a prosecutorial decision, Lynch responded that
there was not.

Lynch told the OIG that she understood from Yates that Comey wanted to
complete the investigation before the political conventions. However,
she said she did not recall being told that Comey had mentioned the
possibility of requesting a special counsel if the investigation
continued beyond that point. She said that, other than letters from
Members of Congress requesting a special counsel to handle the
investigation, no one ever mentioned that a special counsel might be
necessary or might be requested if the investigation took too
long.^[^122^](#fn122){#fnref122 .footnote-ref}^

Lynch said that she had looked at the special counsel regulation at one
point because that is "a decision that the AG has to make," but had not
taken steps to have anyone look into it or research it. She said that
she was convinced that the team handling the investigation could come to
a conclusion. She stated, "I was convinced that if, for example, they
thought that someone should be charged, they were not going to hesitate
to recommend that."

As we discuss in Section IV.B below, Lynch received an ethics opinion
following the tarmac meeting with former President Bill Clinton on June
27, 2016, that she was not required to recuse herself from the Midyear
investigation. She decided not to voluntarily recuse herself for a
variety of reasons, including that she did not have a personal
relationship with either former President Clinton or former Secretary
Clinton.

**B. Subsequent Discussions Between Comey and Yates**

Yates said that sometime after her initial meeting with Comey, she
received a phone call from him in which he said that he had been talking
to "his people," and they had decided that the FBI would not make a
recommendation at all. Yates said that Comey told her that the FBI
instead would "just give DOJ the facts and DOJ would make the decision
and the FBI wouldn't make a recommendation."

According to Yates, Comey described this as the way the FBI and the
Department

"normally do it."

Yates said that she asked Comey what he was talking about, because the
FBI always makes recommendations about charging decisions. According to
Yates, she recalled saying the following to Comey:

Jim, I thought we had talked about it the last meeting.. That we were
all going to hold hands and jump off the bridge together. Because that's
kind of how I viewed this was that this was going to be a tough thing
here. That a lot of people were not going to like our decision but
that's our job. And that we were going to, you know, we were all going
to stand there together. We were going to announce it together.

Yates said that Comey was non-committal after she made this statement.

Yates said that she remembered sitting at her desk after this call and
thinking, "What?" She said that she spoke to Axelrod and Carlin after
hanging up the phone, saying, "Holy cow. I mean, what is this business
of now they're not even going to make a recommendation?"

Yates said that when she thought back to every major announcement she
had done throughout her career, the lead investigative agency was always
involved. She said that by that point it was "really clear that from the
line agents all the way up they were all of the view that this shouldn't
be a criminal prosecution." She said that given that agents and
prosecutors agreed there was no basis to prosecute former Secretary
Clinton, it was important to present a unified view of the
investigation.

Comey told the OIG that he did not recall discussions about the end of
the investigation with the Department other than his initial April
meeting with Yates and Axelrod, and he did not recall any discussions
with them about a joint DirectorAttorney General announcement. Rybicki
also said he did not recall any discussions about the end of the
investigation.

Axelrod said he recalled that the FBI "went back and forth on
whether.they wanted to be, whether they were willing or the Director
was going to be willing to be part of.sort of some sort of joint roll
out." Lynch also told the OIG that she recalled Yates mentioning that at
some point that she had had another discussion with Comey, and that
Comey was no longer sure that he should be the person making the
announcement.

Yates said that after this call with Comey, there were other discussions
with him where they were "back on track" and "all holding hands and
jumping off the bridge together." Yates said she did not recall whether
these subsequent discussions took place face-to-face or on the phone, or
whether anyone else from the FBI was there. She said that they never
made a final decision about how they would announce the declination, but
that it was likely to be with a press conference where they laid out the
facts supporting a conclusion that there was not a crime to be
prosecuted. Yates said she had anticipated that Lynch would speak, but
that they had not determined whether there would be other speakers. She
said that they also planned to release a written document.

Yates told the OIG that she did not recall identifying a target date for
making the announcement, but that they understood it would be a "matter
of days" after the interview of former Secretary Clinton on Saturday,
July 2, 2016. Yates stated, "And we were trying to be careful not to
plan this too much, again, because we hadn't made the final decision
yet. This is where we thought it was going to go but you don't know
until that interview is concluded." Axelrod also told us that plans for
an announcement were not "solidified because we weren't quite at the
end."

**C. Other Discussions within the FBI and Department**

**1. Discussions between McCabe and Carlin**

Axelrod said that the discussions between Yates and Comey about the
conclusion of the case were not the only ones that took place between
the Department and the FBI. He said that during the Spring of 2016,
Toscas, Carlin, Rybicki, and McCabe also were involved in discussions
about how to credibly conclude and announce the conclusion of the
investigation.

We asked various witnesses about these discussions but were unable to
develop a precise timeline for them or a specific recollection of what
was discussed. Carlin told the OIG that he may have talked about how to
credibly announce a declination with McCabe "once or twice." He said
that they discussed the "incredible scrutiny" that the case would
receive and the need to memorialize in writing any disagreements between
the team. He said they also discussed the need for a written description
recounting the steps that were taken in the investigation. Carlin
stated:

And then what made this a little unusual for me anyway was that it came
over as an IG, an 811 referral matter. And so one thing we had discussed
was doing some closeout summary of facts to the IG.. If there
were no criminal charges that doesn't mean there's not more to be done
for the IG and lessons that they can learn from what we did in terms of
the steps that they apparently felt they couldn't take.for things
that were outside Government servers. And so I'd always thought at the
end that some version of just the facts, not our thinking as to whether
or not you bring a criminal charge, should go back to the IG in a
closeout form. So then they could continue with whatever they were going
to do, either administratively because there may be bad practices, or
the set. Substantively it was clear to me from the investigation that
there could be improvements made in terms of how the State Department
was giving guidance and handling potentially classified information.

Carlin said that he did not know if Comey ever approved the idea of a
referral back to IC IG, "But at the Deputy McCabe level I thought
there was some agreement by a meeting of the minds that that was the
likely way we were going to proceed." He said that he did not want to
overstate it or give the impression that everyone had "signed off on"
the idea, but that when he "raised that as a potential course it seemed
like people thought that was reasonable." Carlin said that he did not
recall discussing a joint press appearance by Lynch and Comey.

McCabe told the OIG that he recalled talking to Carlin about how to
credibly conclude the investigation during lunch together in May or June
2016. McCabe said that neither of them had a "very well-formed idea"
about what the end of the investigation looked like at that point, but
that Carlin felt strongly that Comey should have a "very active and
prominent role" in any public announcement.

McCabe said that they discussed various options, including a written
memorandum or a joint press conference.

Asked about his involvement in discussions with the FBI about how to
announce the conclusion of the case, Toscas said that he did not have a
specific recollection of any such discussions. He stated:

I very much wanted the Bureau to be part of the discussion and I
know that there was some discussion of making sure that---or to try to
have a joint AG/FBI Director statement, whether in front of cameras or
an issued written statement, and I remember thinking, and I may have
even talked to our team you know specifically about this, like we
want---like we want the FBI Director talking about this, right. We want
there to be---the American public to know that DOJ and FBI are together
on this and that we\'ve run it down and we\'ve concluded the
investigation.

Toscas also said that he thought that Department leadership separately
was involved in discussions with the FBI about how to announce a
declination, and that he vaguely recalled a discussion the week before
the interview of former Secretary Clinton about what a joint appearance
or statement would look like.

**2. Discussions among Prosecutors and NSD Supervisors**

On March 30, 2016, Prosecutor 1 sent an email to Prosecutor 2 stating,
"Read the Ruth Marcus column in the Washington Post if you haven't
yet."^[^123^](#fn123){#fnref123 .footnote-ref}^ The column referenced in
the email discussed the public skepticism that would result from a
decision not to indict former Secretary Clinton and recommended that the
Department consider releasing a detailed investigative summary. It
included a hyperlink to a public report released by the Department in
2010 that summarized the investigation into the 2001 anthrax letter
attacks. The column also highlighted the need for a credible government
official to provide the public with information about the investigation,
noting, "Senior Justice officials will be mistrusted whatever they say,
but what about FBI Director James B. Comey, who served in the Justice

Department under George W. Bush?" Apparently after reading this column,
Prosecutor 2 replied, "It is not dissimilar from some of the thoughts
running through my head in the middle of the night.or what I tried
expressing at that disastrous meeting we called with Toscas a couple
months ago."

Prosecutor 2 told the OIG that they had a meeting with Toscas in or
around February 2016 focused on what the end of the investigation should
look like. According to Prosecutor 2, Toscas said at this meeting that
the prosecutors would provide their legal analysis and conclusions to
Carlin, through Toscas, and that there was some "vague idea" that Comey
or McCabe would release a statement. This prosecutor told the OIG that
the Department's involvement in any FBI statement was uncertain, and it
was unclear at that point whether the statement would be written or
oral. This prosecutor described this meeting as "contentious," and said
that NSD supervisors seemed to wonder what the line prosecutors wanted
from them. This prosecutor said they brought up the issue of how to
announce the end of the investigation because they were searching for
assurances from their management that high-level Department officials
would be involved. Prosecutor 2 stated:

If the statement is made, who is making that statement? Is it Comey?
Will DOJ be standing by his side? If DOJ is standing by his side, is
that going to be the Attorney General, or is that going to be
Prosecutor 1 and Prosecutor 2? Because Prosecutor 1 and
Prosecutor 2 are driving this investigation for DOJ.

Prosecutor 1 did not recall when the meeting with Toscas took place, but
estimated that it was sometime in early 2016. Prosecutor 1 stated that
the plan discussed at that meeting was for them to finalize their legal
analysis and conclusions and provide it to the NSD chain of command.
Prosecutor 1 said that he also expected that there would be a public
announcement of some sort given the high-profile nature of the
investigation. As described in Section II.C.4 below, Prosecutor 1 said
that as the investigation moved toward completion, he understood that
Comey likely would be the official publicly announcing a declination.

Prosecutors 3 and 4 said that the team thought that the FBI would be
involved in announcing the conclusion of the investigation, but they did
not know what the plans were. Prosecutor 3 stated, "We
speculated.that it would be some FBI report, like maybe a classified
report of findings, and then a public report.because it was a
high-profile investigation.. And no one really knew what, what the
FBI was going to do." Prosecutor 4 told the OIG that he did not care how
announcing a declination was handled, other than he wanted Comey to
participate in it. This prosecutor stated:

And from my vantage point, I didn't care other than the fact that I
wanted Comey up there on a podium. I didn't care whether the AG was
sitting next to, standing next to him or not. But I wanted Comey to make
the announcement that, that the investigation was closed and that in
FBI's viewpoint that there was not a prosecutable case..

Because Comey was a Republican, or had a Republican background. He'd
been a Republican-appointed U.S. Attorney. He had been a
Republican-appointed DAG. I know Comey from his EDVA days. I think,
thought he was widely respected on both sides of the aisle, before this
case especially. And I thought that he had the gravitas, that no matter
what he did, it was going to be questioned, but that it would be, that
there would be an air of legitimacy to what I thought was a legitimate
investigation if he made the announcement, and especially after the
tarmac meeting.

This prosecutor told the OIG that Laufman had tried on several occasions
to raise the issue of planning for a joint announcement at meetings with
the FBI, and that Strzok was "always really squirrely about that." He
said that Strzok would say that they should wait to see how everything
worked out, or that the decision was "above his pay grade."

**3. Additional Special Counsel Discussions**

FBI Attorney 1 told us that the FBI Midyear team discussed whether they
needed a special counsel at the beginning of the investigation in 2015.
She said that at that time they had a legal intern research the statute,
which expired and was replaced by regulations requiring appointment by
the Attorney General.^[^124^](#fn124){#fnref124 .footnote-ref}^ She said
that the discussion among the FBI Midyear team was, "Do we need one?
When would we need one? How does this work sort of questions.. Was it
necessary? And I, and I think we kind of thought we could handle this
without the special counsel."

FBI Attorney 1 stated that the idea of a special counsel came up again
at various points during the investigation, but that "there was not
any really significant discussion about it." She said that the team
thought that they could complete the investigation, and they saw no
signs of a conflict of interest on the part of the NSD lawyers.

Discussions about requesting a special counsel resurfaced within the
Midyear team in mid-March 2016, following the discovery of the highly
classified information, and occurred at various points through at least
mid-May 2016. Text messages between Page and Strzok on March 18, 2016,
indicate that the two of them discussed requesting a special counsel to
oversee the investigation:

7:31 a.m., Strzok: "Thought of the perfect person Director Comey can
bounce this off of."

7:31 a.m., Page: "Who?"

7:37 a.m., Strzok: "Pat Fitzgerald. You gotta give me credit if we
go with him. And delay briefing him on until I can get back and do it.
Late next week or later."

7:38 a.m., Page: "We talked about him last night, not for this, but how
great he is. He's in private practice though, right? Suppose you could
still bring him back. And yes, I'll hold."

7:57 a.m., Strzok: "Yes, he's at Skadden in Chicago. I haven't talked to
him for a year or two. Don't forget that DAG Comey appointed him as
special counsel in the Plame matter, and that he was there for Comey's
investiture."

7:58 a.m., Strzok: "I could work with him again. And damn we'd get sh\*t
DONE."

7:58 a.m., Page: "I know. Like I said, we discussed boss and him
yesterday."

Based on the date of this exchange, Page told the OIG that the discovery
of classified information relating to Lynch likely prompted her
discussion with Strzok, but that she did not recall the idea of
appointing Fitzgerald to be the special counsel for the Midyear
investigation being discussed with FBI leadership. After reviewing a
draft of the report, Page stated that she and Strzok had discussed
consulting Fitzgerald about the classified information relating to
Lynch, not about serving as a special counsel. Strzok said that he did
not recall what led to this discussion, but he speculated that it may
have been motivated by concerns about the information discussed in the
classified appendix to this report. Strzok told the OIG that discussions
about a special counsel reflected a genuine concern about the
Department's ability to credibly close the investigation, denying that
the idea was intended to get the Department to move more quickly on the
Mills and Samuelson laptops.

Although witnesses denied that there was a specific deadline for
completing the Midyear investigation, witnesses told us that Comey and
other senior FBI officials strongly encouraged the team to finish the
investigation as quickly as possible to avoid impacting the 2016
election. Notes reviewed by the OIG reflect that Comey increasingly was
concerned by the timetable for completing the investigation as the
debate about obtaining the laptops continued into May 2016. According to
these notes, on May 9, 2016, Comey met with the FBI's Midyear team and
told them that there "will come a point when DOJ can't credibly close
this, and will need a special prosecutor." On May 11, 2016, other notes
indicate that Comey told agents and prosecutors at a Midyear briefing
that there was an "extraordinary sense of urgency" to complete the
investigation, and that there was the risk that a declination would be
perceived as partisan the closer they got to the election.

The next day, May 12, 2016, Strzok raised the possibility of a special
counsel during a meeting with Laufman. Notes indicate that there was a
lengthy discussion about Comey's timetable for completing the
investigation and the need to obtain the Mills and Samuelson laptops,
and that Strzok mentioned the possibility of requesting a special
counsel if they got closer to the election. Laufman said that he viewed
Strzok's comment as a "veiled threat" to make it clear that the FBI was
dissatisfied with how NSD was handling the laptop issue and would
proceed how it wanted. Laufman said he did not recall other instances
where anyone from the FBI mentioned the possibility of requesting a
special counsel.

**4. NSD Notes Reflecting Plans for an Announcement**

As the team progressed toward the end of the investigation, information
obtained by the OIG indicates that prosecutors and NSD supervisors were
aware that Comey was planning to participate in an announcement. On May
16, 2016, Priestap sent an email to Toscas stating:

I wanted you to be aware that Director Comey would like to see a list of
all cases charged in the last 20 years where the gravamen of the
charge was mishandling classified information. He requested the
information in chart form with: (1) case name, (2) a short summary for
context (3) charges brought, and (4) charge of conviction.

Toscas forwarded the email to Laufman, who replied, "What is the meaning
of this request? Have no problem sharing data we have amassed, but am
concerned that it signifies an expectation by Bureau to play a larger
role in DOJ charging decision than usual." Toscas replied, "We will all
continue to work together with the Bureau on all aspects of this,
including with respect to any such decisions, so we should plan for and
expect that our usual close collaboration with the Bureau will continue
all the way through to the conclusion, including any such decisions."

Toscas also asked Laufman to call him. Notes memorializing a telephone
call that day indicate that Toscas told Laufman, "Bureau may simply
close this.. Don't think this is an insane request. Thinks Comey
wants to see cases because he wants to be able to say why outcome not
out of line. Everyone knows where we are going to end up."

NSD prosecutors prepared a chart of cases indicted since 2000 under
various provisions prohibiting the mishandling and improper retention of
classified information. Toscas emailed McCabe and Rybicki about the
chart on May 23, 2016, and hand-delivered a copy to them at his routine
morning meeting. The email sent by Toscas included the following caveats
distinguishing the charged cases from the Midyear investigation:

While it is not noted specifically in the chart, the vast majority of
the listed cases involved documents or electronic files with
classification markings on them. The few examples of charged cases where
no markings were present involved photographs taken by the defendant
(e.g., a case involving photos inside sensitive areas of a nuclear
submarine) or handwritten notes where there were clear indications of
knowledge of the sensitive nature of the materials (e.g., a case in
which there was a recording of the defendant speaking about the
classified nature of information in his hand-written notebooks).

The "charging/plea information" column should make it clear, but the
mishandling noted in the chart often occurred in conjunction with other
criminal activity, including espionage, export control violations, and
false statements, among others.

The chart did not include any examples of cases charged under Section
793(f).

Asked whether he thought Comey's request signaled a plan for greater
involvement by the FBI, Laufman told the OIG that he viewed it as part
of Comey's desire to make as knowledgeable a decision as possible about
whether to charge Secretary Clinton or her senior aides. He stated, "And
that's a conversation prosecutors always have with the agent, right?.
So, I didn't have any problem arming him with the legal precedents that
we thought informed our judgment, which we expected to be somewhat
controversial, especially on the gross negligence statute."

Notes reviewed by the OIG indicate that Laufman had, or was told about
by Toscas, discussions with the FBI regarding plans to announce a
declination as the interview of former Secretary Clinton approached. In
early June, the FBI and NSD began working jointly on an LHM outlining
the facts developed in the investigation. The prosecutors began
developing the legal framework for their analysis around the same time,
but did not finalize any charging recommendations until after the
interview.

On June 19, 2016, Laufman had a telephone conversation with Strzok about
Comey's plans to make a statement about the investigation. Laufman's
notes from this conversation listed the following topics for discussion:

1.  July 2 \-\-\-\--\> Director's statement.

Q: How many days later?

Q: Content?

E.g., is he planning on saying anything about DOJ's conclusions?

1.  Do you foresee any investigative activity after July 2?

The notes do not indicate what Strzok's responses were about Comey's
plans for a statement. However, according to the notes, Strzok told
Laufman that Comey wanted the investigation to be completed as soon as
feasible, and thought it could be "largely done" other than
classification reviews that were "unlikely to change our view" by
July 2.

Laufman's notes from a telephone call with Toscas on June 24, 2016
indicate that the two of them discussed plans for a coordinated
statement with Comey. The notes state:

"Good news/bad news"

Sounds like greater sense of "ownership" than expected -- coming to
realization that better if Director is person who announces it; and
seems like Director will be up front explaining thoroughness,
conclusion, not proceeding with any case. Voice of joint investigation.

But don't know what form this will take.

Bureau's exploitation of computers: by July 2 completed \-\--\> goal.

Soon after interview, all will be put into motion.

Director will be champing at bit to make announcement..

Want team to sit down with DAG and AG, *before* Director speaks.

On June 27, 2016, Laufman provided this information to Prosecutor 1 and
another NSD supervisor. Laufman's notes from this date state, "Director
will want to wrap up and make announcement quickly after interview..
Will be withering pressure after interview.expect to be very little
that occurs at interview pertinent to mens rea determinations." These
notes discuss the need to complete the joint LHM and the prosecutors'
legal analysis and conclusions as quickly as possible.

Other notes obtained by the OIG indicate that prosecutors expected an
announcement by Comey by Friday, July 8, 2016. On June 30, 2016, Laufman
was told by another NSD supervisor, "Expect that FBI wants to announce
by next Friday.. Wed or Thurs: briefing for DOJ leadership." On July
1, 2016, Laufman received a telephone call from Toscas stating that
Toscas had spoken to McCabe and was told they were "still on track for
Friday and FBI statement that day." Laufman met with Prosecutors 1 and 2
later that day and told them, "No change in known timetable for next
week \-\--\> Friday, July 8 announcement by Bureau. Details not known
yet. Expect briefing of DAG + AG before (Thursday?)" The notes indicate
that the team proposed staying at the FBI after the Clinton interview to
"hash out differences" and finalize the closing LHM.

Asked whether these notes reflected advance knowledge by NSD supervisors
and prosecutors about former Director Comey's plans for a public
statement, Laufman said they did not. He told the OIG that discussions
about how to announce the closing of the case intensified as the
interview of former Secretary Clinton approached. He said that they
understood that Comey was going to make some kind of a statement, but
that anything he was going to say would be closely coordinated with the
Department. He said he had no knowledge of and was not privy to
discussions about plans for a joint statement by Comey and Lynch. Asked
what he thought would happen as of July 1, 2016, he stated:

I expected that we would complete the Clinton interview. The Bureau
would complete its LHM. We would complete our legal analysis.
Discussions would take place within DOJ, between DOJ and the Bureau,
there would be a closely-coordinated endgame, like there is in the
disposition of many matters in the Department where a bunch of

people stand up.in front of a bunch of flags and carefully
orchestrated, well thought through set of statements about a matter..
And we were going to be briefing the AG and the DAG before that.

Laufman also recalled Toscas telling him on several occasions that there
was value in having Comey out front on the investigation, given the
accusations by "political actors" that the Department could not be
trusted to conduct a fair and balanced or complete investigation.

Strzok told the OIG that he participated in discussions with prosecutors
about how to announce the closing of the investigation, including some
discussions with Toscas. Strzok said they discussed whether there would
be a press conference, who would participate in a press conference, and
what level of detail any statement would provide, but he characterized
these discussions as "preliminary." Anderson similarly told the OIG,
"So, I think at some point, DOJ began pressing us to start talking about
the end game. But we, within the Bureau, were already pretty far along
in terms of our own thinking about what we thought the end game should
be, such that we didn't really engage that meaningfully with DOJ on the
issue at the line level."

However, notes indicate that FBI agents, lawyers, and senior officials
were aware that the Department expected to make a joint announcement
with the FBI at the end of the investigation. According to FBI Attorney
1's notes from a Midyear update meeting with Comey on June 27, 2016, the
FBI discussed this expectation, stating, "Laufman saying pros memo +
joint statement one week after HRC interview." Page's notes from the
June 27 meeting indicate that FBI leadership told the Midyear team what
to say to NSD about an announcement: "Clinton Interview
Saturday; LHM Tuesday, and our leadership will be talking to
yours, & what you expect a final announcement will look like."

The next day, June 28, 2016, Laufman's notes reflect that an attorney in
NSD's Front Office asked him to call Strzok and find out when the FBI
planned to close the investigation. The notes read, "If not w/in short
order after July 2 -- if not by next week -- Why not?! What's the
plan...?" The notes indicate that Laufman spoke to Strzok, and Strzok
told him that the FBI would finalize the LHM by the following Tuesday.
The notes indicate that Laufman asked what Comey's goal was for
announcing the closing of the investigation, and Strzok told Laufman he
was not sure how soon it would be. That same day, Strzok and Page
exchanged the following text messages:

12:43 p.m., Strzok: \"God I am getting GRILLED by Laufman right now."

12:46 p.m., Page: "You've got your answer to give him.."

12:52 p.m., Strzok: "I do.Still going.."

**III. Drafting of Former Director Comey's Public Statement**

**A. Original Draft Statement**

Former Director Comey told the OIG that after his initial meeting with
Yates and Axelrod in April 2016, he began thinking about the "outer
boundaries" for announcing the conclusion of the investigation. He
explained that a one-line press release by the Department stating that
the case was closed was one outer boundary, and an FBI-only press
conference providing a detailed statement about the investigation was
the other. Comey said that the team from Strzok and the Lead Analyst on
up discussed every option in between these two "outer boundaries." Comey
told the OIG that he considered what options would be best calculated to
minimize the reputational damage to the Department that might result
from a declination decision given the partisan political environment in
the country at that time.

Comey said that the possibility of the FBI doing a statement separate
from the Department occurred to him around that time. He stated:

I mean to my mind it was a crazy idea, but we were in a 500-year
flood, as you all have now investigated enough and lived enough to know,
that this is a circumstance that has never happened before. We're
criminally investigating one of the candidates for president of the
United States.. President Obama's comments obviously weighed
on me as well. You've got the President who has already said there's no
there there.. And so all of that creates a situation where how do we
get out of this without grievous damage to the institution?

Comey told us that, in addition to preserving the credibility and
integrity of the Department and the FBI, his concern was protecting "a
sense of justice more broadly in the country---that things are fair not
fixed, and they're done independently."

McCabe told the OIG that he recalled that Comey first mentioned the idea
of doing an independent statement as "an aside, at either the beginning
or the end of a meeting that we had.in his conference room." McCabe
said that Baker and Rybicki also were present, and that the group had
been discussing where the investigation was going and what the end would
look like "if we end up with nothing." He said that Comey asked them,
"What do you think about the prospect of just like me doing
something solo?" McCabe stated:

And I remember when he said it kind of looking at Rybicki. And the both
of us are just kind of like, oh my God, you know? And I, I mean honestly
I, I, at first blush I was like, whew, wow, that's, that could go really
wrong.. Because for, you know, for the obvious reason. It's just so
not what we do. And we thought.that would be a huge break
with.protocol.and everything else.

McCabe said that he may have told Comey that he was concerned that an
independent statement would be a "complete departure" from Department
protocol and could set a "potentially dangerous precedent" for the FBI.
McCabe said that Comey was "very aware" that there were many reasons he
should not do a statement on his own, and that "conventional wisdom
might mitigate against it." He said that in late April and early May
2016, Comey was "not anywhere close to having decided to do it that
way."

Comey told the OIG that he sat down one weekend and typed out a draft
statement. He told the OIG that he did so from memory, explaining that
it helps him to write when he is struggling with an idea. Comey
described the draft statement as a "straw person," and told the OIG that
he did this with the intention of giving the draft to the team and
asking, "What do you think?"

On May 2, 2016, Comey sent an email to McCabe, Baker, and Rybicki
including the text of the draft "straw person." He stated at the
beginning of the email:

I've been trying to imagine what it would look like if I decided to do
an

FBI only press event to close out our work and hand the matter to DOJ.
To help shape our discussions of whether that, or something different,
makes sense, I have spent some time crafting what I would say, which
follows. In my imagination, I don't see me taking any questions. Here is
what it might look like.

Comey sent a four-page draft statement outlining what the Midyear team
did and found by email, which we have provided as Attachment C to this
report. The May 2 draft was substantially similar to Comey's final
version, but with several notable exceptions. In particular, the May 2
draft statement used the statutory language from Section 793(f)(1),
describing former Secretary Clinton's handling of classified information
as "grossly negligent." It also concluded that there was evidence of
potential violations of this provision and the misdemeanor removal
statute, Section 1924. The draft stated:

There is evidence to support a conclusion that Secretary Clinton, and
others, used the private email server in a manner that was grossly
negligent with respect to the handling of classified information..
There is evidence to support a conclusion that any reasonable person in
Secretary Clinton's position, or in the position of those government
employees with whom she was corresponding about these matters, should
have known that an unclassified system was no place for such an email
conversation. Although we did not find clear evidence that Secretary
Clinton or her colleagues intended to violate laws governing the
handling of classified information, there is evidence that they were
extremely careless in their handling of very sensitive, highly
classified information.

Similarly, the sheer volume of information that was properly classified
as Secret at the time it was discussed on email (that is, excluding the
"up classified" emails) supports an inference that the participants were
grossly negligent in their handling of that information..

Finally, with respect to our recommendation to the Department of
Justice. In our system, the prosecutors make the decisions about whether
charges are appropriate based on evidence the FBI has helped collect.
Although we don't normally make public our recommendations to the
prosecutors, we frequently make recommendations and engage in productive
conversations with prosecutors about what resolution may be appropriate,
given the evidence. In this case, given the importance of the matter, I
think unusual transparency is in order.

Although there is evidence of potential violations of the statute
proscribing gross negligence in the handling of classified information
and of the statute proscribing misdemeanor mishandling, my judgment is
that no reasonable prosecutor would bring such a case. At the outset, we
are not aware of a case where anyone has been charged solely based on
the gross negligence prohibition in the statute. All charged cases of
which we are aware have involved the accusation

that a government employee intentionally mishandled classified
information. In looking back at our investigations in similar
circumstances, we cannot find a case that would support bringing
criminal charges on these facts. All the cases prosecuted involved some
combination of: (1) clearly intentional misconduct; (2) vast quantities
of materials exposed in such a way as to support an inference of
intentional misconduct; (3) indications of disloyalty to the United
States; or (4) efforts to obstruct justice. We see none of that here.

As described in more detail below, the language characterizing former
Secretary Clinton's conduct as "grossly negligent," the inference of
gross negligence from the volume of classified email, and the reference
to the misdemeanor mishandling statute were omitted from the final
version delivered by Comey on July 5, 2016.

We asked Comey about the date of this initial draft and whether it
indicated that he had predecided the outcome of the investigation even
before the interview of former Secretary Clinton. Comey stated:

If you were in my position after nine months you're incompetent if
you don't know where this is going. Now the notion that I committed
perjury by saying the decision wasn't made by then. The decision was not
made by then. But it was a high probability.this was going to end in
a certain way that would be really, really hard, which is the
declination, so we better get to work thinking about that. Now if we
find something else, great, or if.Hillary Clinton either gives us
18 U.S.C. § 1001 false statements during the interview or the
team says you know what, we've got to dig into some more stuff because
she might have lied to us, wants to pursue additional investigative
steps, you either recommend the 1001 or you say you know what, we've got
more work to do here.. But in May, unless those things happen, I can
see where this is headed and we've got to start to think carefully
because you cannot be thinking about this on the weekend before the case
ends. That's my reaction.

Comey also told the OIG that when he wrote the May 2 draft, he thought
the investigation would be completed by June. As described in more
detail below, Comey said he did not recall that his original draft used
the term "gross negligence," and did not recall discussions about that
issue.

On May 6, 2016, Comey emailed Rybicki and McCabe, stating, "Think maybe
you should share my straw person announcement with Priestap, Strzok,
and the Lead Analyst. Close hold to the three of them but might be
good to get them thinking." That afternoon, McCabe forwarded the draft
statement to Priestap, Strzok, and the Lead Analyst, as well as Page. In
the email, McCabe stated:

The Director composed the below straw man in an effort to compose what a
"final" statement might look like in the context of a press conference.
This was really more of an exercise for him to get his thoughts on the
matter in order, and not any kind of decision about venue, strategy,
product, etc.

The Director asked me to share this with you four, *but not any
further*. The only additional people who have seen this draft are Jim
Rybicki and Jim Baker. Please do not disseminate or discuss any further.
(Emphasis in original).

McCabe's email noted that Comey might want to discuss the draft at the
update meeting the following Monday, May 9, 2016. Strzok replied,
"Understood and will do." McCabe then replied to Comey, "Spoke to Bill
Priestap and passed the email on the red side to Bill, Pete and
the Lead Analyst. Also took the liberty of including Lisa Page
-- I hope that was ok."

On May 6, 2016, shortly after receiving the draft, Priestap sent McCabe
his initial comments. Priestap stated, "The piece is superb," and made
several suggestions for minor changes. Priestap also noted that the
draft contained information indicating that former Secretary Clinton did
not comply with federal record requirements, suggesting that Comey have
someone study the impact such a statement could have on administrative
inquiries related to federal record obligations. McCabe sent these
comments to Comey the following week.

On May 16, 2016, Rybicki sent the original draft to a larger group of
people that included Anderson, FBI Attorney 1, and Bowdich, stating,
"Please send me any comments on this statement so we may roll into a
master doc for discussion with the Director at a future date." The draft
statement also was discussed at a meeting that day that was attended by
Comey, Rybicki, Bowdich, Steinbach, Priestap, Strzok, the Lead Analyst,
Baker, Anderson, FBI Attorney 1, and Page. According to notes from this
meeting, one of the items discussed was, "Do we agree with gross
negligence assessment??"

Later that same day, the Lead Analyst provided comments to Strzok for
incorporation into a "team response." The Lead Analyst characterized his
comments as technical corrections, including one in which he recommended
highlighting that some of the emails were found to contain classified
information when sent, not just after the fact. The Lead Analyst stated,
"All of this to emphasize that it is not true that this is all a matter
of classification after-the-fact and that the people sending these
emails should have known better."

Strzok included these comments and added his and Page's to an email that
he sent to Rybicki, McCabe, and Priestap on behalf of the team on May
17, 2016. This email provided "overarching observations" about the
draft, stating that they would provide additional comments and fact
checking as Comey narrowed down what he wanted to say. Among the
specific recommendations provided were suggestions that the statement
include the number of emails containing information that was determined
to be classified at the time they were sent to "more directly counter
the continuous characterization by Hillary Clinton describing the emails
involved in this investigation as having been classified after the
fact."

The May 17 comments also noted the need to distinguish between prior
highprofile mishandling prosecutions and the Midyear investigation.
Strzok stated:

We'd draw the distinction in noting that we have no evidence classified
information was ever shared with an unauthorized party, i.e.,
notwithstanding the server set up, we have not seen classified
information shared with a member of the media, an agent of a foreign
power, a lover, etc. Additionally, it's important to note that had these
same emails been sent on a state.gov system rather than a private one,
it's not clear that the FBI would currently have an open investigation.

The May 17 email also commented on language in the initial draft that it
was "reasonably likely that hostile actors gained access to Secretary
Clinton's private email account." Strzok stated:

It is more accurate to say we know foreign actors obtained access to
some of her emails (including at least one Secret one) via compromises
of the private email accounts of some of her staffers. It's also
accurate to say that a sophisticated foreign actor would likely have
known about her private email domain, and would be competent enough not
to leave a trace if they gained access. But we have seen no direct
evidence they did.

Finally, the May 17 comments listed "whether her conduct rises to the
legal definition of gross negligence" as a topic for further discussion.

Responding to Strzok's email, Priestap provided additional comments on
the draft the following day, May 18, 2016. Priestap suggested that the
statement should more fully describe the FBI's role in recommending or
not recommending that charges be brought in criminal cases, and why
Comey was recommending that charges not be brought against former
Secretary Clinton, stating:

I believe it's equally important for the Director to more fully explain
why the FBI can, in good faith, recommend to DOJ that they not charge
someone who has committed a crime (as defined by the letter of the law).
It's important the Director explain our recommendation from the FBI
perspective and not from the DOJ/prosecutorial perspective. The *FBI* is
recommending that charges not be brought in this instance, not only
because "no reasonable prosecutor would bring such a case," but because
the FBI believes it's the right thing to do based on.. (Emphasis and
ellipses in original).

Priestap also suggested that Comey had the option of not making a
charging recommendation at all, but that this would undermine the FBI's
position with the Department in future cases. He suggested that Comey
could emphasize privately to the Department that it should take the
FBI's charging recommendations seriously, stating, "DOJ can't just stand
with us when it's easy for them to do so." Priestap's comments also
stated, "While I was initially wary of having the Director provide an
investigative update, I'm beginning to warm to the idea.if we don't
soon shape the narrative with the facts, the narrative will be shaped by
others, potentially harming the FBI."

According to a meeting log prepared by FBI OGC, on May 24, 2016, Comey
met with Page, Strzok, Baker, Anderson, FBI Attorney 1, and others to
discuss the statement. Page's notes from the meeting indicate that the
group discussed adding language highlighting how well the Midyear
investigation was done and that there had been no political
interference. The notes also state that they planned to "have another
conversation about the strategy at all sic."

**B. The Decision to Omit "Gross Negligence"**

Comey again met with Rybicki, Bowdich, Steinbach, Priestap, Strzok, the
Lead Analyst, Baker, Anderson, FBI Attorney 1, and Page to discuss the
statement on May 31, 2016. Notes from this meeting indicate that the
discussion included "Lisa Page/FBI Attorney 1 legal thinking."
According to Page, she raised concerns about the use of "grossly
negligent" in the draft statement at one of the meetings with Comey
(likely the May 31 meeting) before making edits to the statement. Page
told us:

I believe that I raised with Comey the concern.with the use of
gross negligence in particular because I was concerned that it would be
confusing if we used a.term that has a legal definition.if we say
she's grossly negligent, that despite the fact that we, we and the
Department had a good reason to not charge her with gross negligence,
given the fact that they thought it was unconstitutionally vague, and it
had never been done, and, you know, sort of all of the concomitant
defenses that would also follow from, from her conduct, that it would
just be overly confusing.

Page further stated, "If the purpose of this is sort of clarity, and the
purpose of this is to sort of try to explain to the American populace
what happened and what we think about it, that to use a term that had an
actual legal definition would be confusing." She said that the team
discussed the need to find some other way to characterize former
Secretary Clinton's conduct.

FBI Attorney 1 told the OIG that she remembered sitting down with
Rybicki, Strzok, the Lead Analyst, and Page to discuss the language of
the statute and whether to use "grossly negligent" wording in the draft
statement. Based on a meeting log prepared by FBI OGC, we determined
that this meeting took place on June 6, 2016. Rybicki said that he did
not recall the substance of discussions about removing "grossly
negligent" from the draft, but that there was "a lot of discussion"
among the FBI OGC lawyers about the statute." He said he primarily input
changes made by others and described his role in revising the statement
as "scribe detail."

After this meeting, Strzok, the Lead Analyst, Page, and FBI Attorney 1
met to edit the statement. Page told the OIG that the four of them
edited the document together at Strzok's computer. Metadata from a
version of the statement indicates that Strzok modified the draft on
June 6, 2016.^[^125^](#fn125){#fnref125 .footnote-ref}^

The next day, June 7, 2016, Strzok emailed an electronic copy of the
revised draft to Page, and Page sent it to Rybicki, stating in the
email, "Our thoughts, for the Director's consideration." The revised
draft attached to Page's email was entitled "MYE thoughts 06-07-16" and
included a number of changes from Comey's original draft. Among the
changes in the revised draft was the removal of the conclusion that
there was evidence that former Secretary Clinton and her staff were
"grossly negligent" in their handling of classified information.
Instead, the June 7 draft moved language from the end of the same
paragraph in Comey's original version to the beginning of that
paragraph, stating:

Although we did not find evidence that Secretary Clinton or her
colleagues intended to violate laws governing the handling of classified
information, there is evidence that they were extremely careless in
their handling of very sensitive, highly classified information..
There is evidence to support a conclusion that any reasonable person in
Secretary Clinton's position, or in the position of those government
employees with whom she was corresponding about these matters, should
have known that an unclassified system was no place for such an email
conversation.

Page told us that FBI Attorney 1 was the one who moved "extremely
careless" to the beginning of the paragraph. FBI Attorney 1 agreed that
she likely was the one who suggested this edit given that she had the
most familiarity with the statute. This change was included in the final
version of the statement.

The draft also removed a reference to evidence of potential violations
of the misdemeanor mishandling statute.^[^126^](#fn126){#fnref126
.footnote-ref}^ The draft instead concluded that there was evidence of
potential violations of statutes regarding the handling of classified
information, and used the language from Comey's original draft that no
reasonable prosecutor would bring such a case.

The June 7 draft included two other significant changes. It removed the
statement that the sheer volume of information classified as Secret
supported an inference of gross negligence, replacing it with a
statement that the Secret information they discovered was "especially
concerning because all of these emails were housed on servers not
supported by full-time staff." The draft also stated that it was
"possible," rather than "reasonably likely," that hostile actors gained
access to former Secretary Clinton's server.^[^127^](#fn127){#fnref127
.footnote-ref}^

Comey told the OIG that he did not recall that his initial draft used
"grossly negligent," and did not specifically recall what discussions
led to this change. He said that the group that met to discuss the
drafts of his statement---which included Rybicki, Bowdich, Steinbach,
Priestap, Strzok, the Lead Analyst, Baker, Anderson, FBI Attorney 1, and
Page---struggled to figure out what term to use to describe former
Secretary Clinton's conduct, because "it was more than your ordinary
somebody left a document in a unprotected place or had a single
conversation." According to Comey, they tried to capture the sense that
her use of the private server was "really sloppy, but it doesn't rise to
the level of prosecution." He speculated during his OIG interview that
the team advised him that it was unwise to track the statutory language
because the "grossly negligent" conduct required by Section 793(f) is
something just short of willful or reckless.

Comey told the OIG that nothing the FBI learned between May 2 and July 5
changed their view of whether former Secretary Clinton's conduct met the
definition of "gross negligence." Comey said that it was his
understanding based on the statute's legislative history that Congress
intended for there to be some level of willfulness present even to prove
a "gross negligence" violation. When asked whether he believed at any
time in the process that former Secretary Clinton was grossly negligent
within the meaning of Section 793(f), Comey said, "No." Comey explained:

There was no evidence to establish anything close to willfulness which I
take as a conscious disregard of a non-legal duty and that the closest
to there to me was, it's just really sloppy. A reasonable person in her
position should have known, but what I understood 793(f) to be about is
something closer to actual knowledge, but I think that it was this is
obviously wildly distorted, but I think that's what we were grappling
with..

I'm trying to find a way to credibly describe what we think she did and
our sense was, frankly mere negligence didn't get it because it was not
just ordinary sloppiness, it was sloppiness across a multiyear period
and so there was, I had in my head some sense that to be credible, we
have to capture that and what words do we use to capture it---and that's
where we found the formulation extremely careless. Now if I had to do it
over again, I might have tried to find another term because this, we
sort of walked into this entire side show about 793(f), but I haven't
thought of another term since then.

Comey said that he thought that the June 7 edits "tracked his
formulation" by moving the "extremely careless" language from the end of
the paragraph in his original draft to the beginning.

After reviewing a draft of the report, Anderson told the OIG that she
raised concerns about the use of the phrase "extremely careless" to
describe former Secretary Clinton's conduct, as being unnecessary to the
statement and also likely to raise questions as to why the conduct did
not constitute gross negligence. Anderson said that she recalled that
others voiced the same concern, but that she did not recall precisely
who raised this issue or what was said. She said that she recalled that
Comey felt strongly that former Secretary Clinton's behavior was
"extremely careless," and thought that this was the most accurate phrase
to describe Clinton's conduct notwithstanding concerns about criticizing
her uncharged conduct or the potential for confusion.

**C. Comey's Edits to the Statement**

On June 10, 2016, Rybicki emailed a revised draft of the statement to

Comey. Two days later, on June 12, 2016, Comey emailed additional
revisions to Rybicki. Comey stated in his email, "Here is my near final
draft. Please have the team review it. I have saved as PDF so the
team reads it fresh and not as a trackchange."

Comey's June 12 draft incorporated the "extremely careless" language
from the previous revisions:

Although we did not find clear evidence that Secretary Clinton or her
colleagues intended to violate laws governing the handling of classified
information, there is evidence that they were extremely careless in
their handling of very sensitive, highly classified information.

For example, seven email chains concern matters that were classified at
the Top Secret/Special Access Program level when they were sent and
received. These chains involved Secretary Clinton both sending emails
about those matters and receiving emails from others about the same
matters. There is evidence to support a conclusion that any reasonable
person in Secretary Clinton's position, or in the position of those
government employees with whom she was corresponding about these
matters, should have known that an unclassified system was no place for
that conversation. In addition to this highly sensitive information, we
also found information that was properly classified as Secret by the
U.S. Intelligence Community at the time it was discussed on email (that
is, excluding the later "upclassified" emails).

Comey's June 12 draft added new language that stated, "Separately, it is
important to point out that even if information is not marked
'classified' in an email, participants who know or should know that the
subject matter is classified are still obligated to protect it." This
language was included in a revised form in the final statement delivered
by Comey.

The revisions by Comey and Rybicki included new language about the
factors that a "reasonable prosecutor" would consider in declining to
prosecute a case. Comey's June 12 draft stated:

Although there is evidence of potential violations of the statutes
regarding the handling of classified information, our judgment is that
no reasonable prosecutor would bring such a case. Prosecutors
necessarily weigh a number of factors before bringing charges. There are
obvious considerations, like the strength of the evidence, especially
about intent. Responsible decisions also consider the context of a
person's actions, and how similar situations have been handled in the
past.

In looking back at our investigations into mishandling or removal of
classified information, we cannot find a case that would support
bringing criminal charges on these facts. All the cases prosecuted
involved some combination of: clearly intentional and willful
mishandling of classified information; or vast quantities of materials
exposed in such a way as to support an inference of intentional
misconduct; or indications of disloyalty to the United States; or
efforts to obstruct justice. We do not see those things here.

To be clear, this is not to suggest that in similar circumstances, a
person who engaged in this activity would face no consequences. To the
contrary, those individuals are often subject to security or
administrative sanctions. But that is not what we are deciding now.

Following these revisions, discussions about the draft statement
continued. Meetings took place on June 13, 14, and 15 to discuss various
issues related to the draft. Documents provide little information about
the substance of these meetings, and witnesses did not have a specific
recollection of them.

Comey and Rybicki also continued to refine the draft statement,
exchanging revised versions on June 25, 26, and 30, and July 1, 2, and
4. Two significant changes appeared in the statement during this time
period.

A June 25 draft added a sentence to a paragraph that summarized the
factors that led the FBI to conclude that it was possible that hostile
actors accessed former Secretary Clinton's private server. This new
sentence stated, "She also used her personal email extensively while
outside the United States, including from the territory of sophisticated
adversaries. That use included an email exchange with the President
while Secretary Clinton was on sic the territory of such an
adversary." On June 30, Rybicki circulated another version that changed
the second sentence to remove the reference to the President, replacing
it with "another senior government official."^137^ The final version of
the statement omitted this reference altogether and instead read, "She
also used her personal email extensively while outside the United
States, including sending and receiving workrelated emails in the
territory of sophisticated adversaries." FBI emails indicate that the
decision to remove this sentence was based on concerns about litigation
risk under the Privacy Act.

In addition, on the morning of June 30, Comey added the following
paragraph to the statement introduction:

This will be an unusual statement in at least a couple ways. First, I am
going to include more detail than I ordinarily would, because I think
the American people deserve those details in a case of intense public
interest. Second, I have not coordinated or reviewed this statement in
any way with the Department of Justice or any other part of the
government. They do not know what I am about to say.

This paragraph was included in the final version of the statement that
Comey publicly delivered on July 5, 2016. While we did not ask Comey if
he added this paragraph in response to the tarmac meeting between Lynch
and former President Clinton, as described below in Section IV.D, Comey
told us that this meeting "tipped the scales" in terms of his decision
to deliver his statement "separate and apart" from the Department.^138^

137. After reviewing a draft of this report, Rybicki explained that,
    although he circulated the new version of the draft statement, he
    did not suggest or make this specific edit.
138. Text messages between Page and Strzok on July 1, 2016, the day
    Lynch announced she would accept the recommendations of career
    prosecutors and agents, speculated that the tarmac meeting was the
    reason for inserting the "no coordination" language:

5:34 p.m., Strzok: "Holy cow.nyt breaking Apuzzo, Lynch will
accept whatever rec D and career prosecutors make. No political
appointee input."

5:41 p.m., Strzok: "Lynch. Timing not great, but whatever. Wonder if
that's why the no coordination language added."

7:29 p.m., Strzok: "Timing looks like hell. Will appear choreographed.
All major news networks literally leading with 'AG to accept FBI D's
recommendation.'"

7:30 p.m., Page: "Yeah, that is awful timing. Nothing we can do about
it."

7:31 p.m., Strzok: "What I meant was, did DOJ tell us yesterday they
were doing this, so D added that language?"

7:31 p.m., Strzok: "Yep. I told Bill the same thing. Delaying just makes
it worse."

7:35 p.m., Page: "And yes. I think we had some warning of it. I know
they sent some statement to rybicki, bc he called andy."

7:35 p.m., Page: "And yeah, it's a real profile in courage, since
she knows no charges will be brought."

**D. FBI Analysis of Legal and Policy Issues Implicated by the Draft
Statement**

Comey told the OIG that he included criticism of former Secretary
Clinton's uncharged conduct because "unusual transparency...was
necessary for an unprecedented situation," and that such transparency
"was the best chance we had of having the American people have
confidence that the justice system works."

He said that that he asked Baker and FBI OGC to "scrub" his draft
statement and "think about it through all possible policy, legal
lenses." He said that his recollection was that "the only issue they
thought that was worthy of discussion was the Privacy Act, and they had
their Privacy Act czar do a memo for me laying out how---why they
thought it was fine under the Privacy Act."^[^128^](#fn128){#fnref128
.footnote-ref}^ Comey said that Baker's advice to him was that "there
were no policy or legal issues created by you doing this." Baker
told the OIG that he and other FBI OGC attorneys did see numerous legal
and policy issues associated with the statement, but that they could not
find a clear legal prohibition that would have prevented Comey from
issuing the statement.

Comey cited as precedent for his statement the press conference he gave
in June 2004, when he was the Deputy Attorney General, summarizing the
evidence against José Padilla, a U.S. citizen who had been designated as
an enemy combatant due to his support for al
Qaeda.^[^129^](#fn129){#fnref129 .footnote-ref}^ He stated:

I mean it wasn't a case, but I actually remember when I was DAG
providing extraordinary transparency to the public around José Padilla
which was a subject of great concern and controversy at the time and I
remember commissioning the drafting of a very transparent statement
about everything we knew about him and then pushing to get it
declassified, get it reviewed for Privacy Act compliance which we also
did here and then getting that out, so I remembered that pretty well.

Comey also cited the Department's letter to Congress summarizing the
results of the criminal investigation into Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) officials, including Lois Lerner.^141^ Comey said that the Lerner
letter, which criticized IRS officials for "mismanagement, poor
judgment, and institutional inertia" that did not amount to criminal
conduct, supported his decision to criticize former Secretary Clinton's
handling of classified information even in the absence of sufficient
evidence to establish her criminal liability.^142^

Witnesses told us that the Privacy Act concerns stemmed largely from
Comey's criticism of former Secretary Clinton's conduct in his draft
statement, but that they believed including such criticism served a
legitimate law enforcement function (and thus was permitted). According
to FBI Attorney 1, the high public interest in the case, the particular
individual involved, and the need to deter others provided
justifications for including the information:

So it wasn't just that we weren't prosecuting her, but you didn't want
to leave the impression with.the rest of the community that she's
getting away with something or.that this is okay to do this. And so I
think there was that, that balance. And that's why I don't think I
thought so hard about the, the fact that we were talking about uncharged
conduct of her. I was thinking more in terms of well we need to kind of
balance this so that people understand that we're not

141. On October 23, 2015, the Department's Office of Legislative Affairs
    (OLA) sent a letter to

Congress summarizing the results of a criminal investigation conducted
by the Criminal and Civil

Rights Divisions, in conjunction with the FBI and the Treasury Inspector
General for Tax

Administration, into whether any IRS official targeted tax-exempt
organizations for scrutiny based on their ideological views. The letter
stated that the investigation uncovered "substantial evidence of
mismanagement, poor judgment, and institutional inertia," but "no
evidence that any IRS official acted based on political, discriminatory,
corrupt, or other inappropriate motives that would support a criminal
prosecution." Regarding Lois Lerner, the former Director of the IRS
Exempt Organizations Division, the letter stated that the investigation
had focused on her criminal culpability given her oversight role and
emails discovered in which she "expressed her personal political views
and, in one case, hostility toward conservative radio personalities."
The letter concluded that Lerner "exercised poor judgment in using her
IRS email account to exchange personal messages that reflected her
political views," but that prosecutors could not "show that these
messages related to her official duties and actions." Peter Kadzik,
Assistant Attorney General, U.S. Department of Justice, letter to The
Honorable Bob Goodlatte and John Conyers, Jr., October 23, 2015, *at*
http://online.wsj.com/public/resources/documents/IRS1023.pdf.

141. Comey told the OIG that "a friend of his who is a law
    professor" had a law student compile a chart showing cases in which
    the Department made a public statement announcing the closing of an
    investigation. The chart was created in January 2017, and included
    31 cases since February 2010 in which such statements were made by
    Department leadership or a U.S. Attorney's

Office. Although the chart noted one case in which an FBI agent spoke at
a press conference with the U.S. Attorney, every case listed in the
chart involved a public statement coordinated with or made by the
prosecutors. The OIG determined that the "law professor" referenced by
Comey was Dan Richman, a professor at Columbia Law School who was also a
special government employee (SGE) for the FBI from June 2015 to February
2017.

giving her a clean bill of health, you know, and that people can do this
kind of activity.

Anderson told the OIG that she expressed concerns about criticizing
uncharged conduct during discussions with Comey in June 2016. She said
that the decision to include such criticism "was a signal that.we
weren't just letting her off the hook.. Our conclusions were
going to be viewed as less assailable.at the end of the day if this
kind of content was included."

Baker told the OIG that "there were multiple audiences" for the
criticism of former Secretary Clinton in Comey's statement. He recounted
hearing that FBI employees not involved in the Midyear investigation
hated former Secretary Clinton and had made comments such as, "You
guys are finally going to get that bitch," and, "We're rooting for
you." Baker stated, "And if we're not going to get her on these facts
and circumstances, then we'd better explain that now." Related to this
idea, notes taken by Strzok at a May 12, 2016 meeting involving the
Midyear team state, "Messaging thoughts: Workforce Qs: (1) If I did
this, I'd be prosecuted; (2)

Petraeus, Berger, etc. were charged; (3) Overwhelming conservative
outlook."

FBI Attorney 1 told the OIG that she also considered whether the July 5
statement would violate the Department's Election Year Sensitivities
Policy. As described in Chapter Two, that policy requires approval from
the Public Integrity Section of the Criminal Division before filing
charges or taking overt investigative steps near the time of a primary
or general election. However, the policy applies only to election crimes
cases. FBI Attorney 1 told us, "Someone mentioned the policy at that
time. And I looked into it, and.it's not specific to this kind of
case.

And that's kind of the problem, I think, with the policy."

Baker told the OIG that the FBI took into account and complied with the
requirement that Department personnel obtain the approval of the
Attorney General or the Deputy Attorney General for the public release
of certain information.^[^130^](#fn130){#fnref130 .footnote-ref}^ Baker
said that Comey's call to Lynch and Yates on the morning of his July 5
press conference (described below) telling them that he planned to hold
a press conference later that morning, and their failure to instruct him
not to do so, constituted "permission" under Department regulations.
Baker said that this was so even though Comey called Lynch and Yates
only after calling the press and he had refused to tell Lynch and Yates
what he planned to say. When pressed by the OIG about this
interpretation of the regulation, Baker acknowledged that it was
"aggressive." In comments to the draft report, Baker further explained
that because Comey did call Yates and Lynch on July 5:

They could have demanded to know what he was going to say, and/or could
have told him not to do it without a full discussion with them. They did
not. One is the AG, the other the DAG. They had an opportunity to say
"no" or "stop" to the FBI Director. For whatever reasons, they did not.
That is on them.

**E. Concerns about a Public Statement**

Numerous witnesses told the OIG that, while they did not recall any
significant disagreement within the FBI about whether Comey should do a
public statement, there was concern about whether he should do one on
his own, without advance notification to or coordination with the
Department. McCabe's initial reaction to the idea was that it would
breach Department protocol and create "dangerous precedent" for the FBI,
among "a million other possible things" that could go wrong. However,
McCabe told the OIG, "Ultimately I was convinced that, that he was
doing what he thought was right and that what was right for the case."

Baker told the OIG that he raised similar concerns in various one-on-one
discussions with Comey over an extended time period. Baker said he did
so because he "viewed it as my obligation to push back aggressively with
respect to whatever Comey said if I thought it was wrong," to make
sure that all legal, policy, and ethical issues were fully evaluated,
and to "think about how others would think about things" from different
perspectives and at different times. Baker said that he and Comey
discussed a range of options for announcing a declination and thought
through the benefits and drawbacks of each, "trying to find some
door other than the doors that led to hell."

Comey also sought input from his former FBI Chief of Staff, Chuck

Rosenberg, who at the time was the Acting Administrator of the Drug
Enforcement

Administration. Comey told the OIG that in May and June 2016 he spoke to
Rosenberg and "sounded him out" about the possibility of doing an
FBI-only press announcement to close the investigation. According to
Comey, Rosenberg was concerned that doing a statement would be
unprecedented, expose Comey to "extraordinary fire," and create an
irreparable breach with the Department. Comey said that Rosenberg
thought that doing the statement was a "close call, but on balance, it's
the right call."

Rosenberg told the OIG that he spoke to Comey three times about the
draft statement. He said that Comey first reached out to him in late
April or early May 2016, before there was a draft statement and well
before the tarmac meeting between Lynch and former President Clinton.
Rosenberg said that Comey was seeking guidance on whether he should make
a public statement to announce the FBI was closing the Midyear
investigation, or should do a referral to the Department. Rosenberg
described Comey as "wrestling" with the decision and trying to figure
out the right thing to do.

Rosenberg said that Comey showed him a hard copy of the May 2 draft
statement, and told him that he planned to do the statement on his own,
without coordinating with the Department. Rosenberg said that Comey
thought he could more credibly announce a declination without the
Department because of the "politics" of having an Attorney General
appointed by a Democratic President close an investigation into the
Democratic presidential nominee without charges. Asked whether Comey
discussed concerns about Lynch based on her instruction to him to call
the investigation a "matter" or classified issues reflecting potential
bias by her, Rosenberg said that he did not recall Comey mentioning
those to him.

Rosenberg said that he had two competing reactions to the statement. He
said that on one hand, it was "outside the norm" and inconsistent with
the Department's practice, and that had the FBI publicly announced a
recommendation when he was a U.S. Attorney instead of giving it to him
privately, he would not have been happy. On the other hand, he thought
that Comey was a "compelling and credible public servant," and he said
he understood why Comey thought he could "do this and do it well."
Rosenberg said that he did not tell Comey that it was a good or bad
idea, but instead raised questions about what other options were
available and the potential ramifications of an FBI Director giving a
public declination. Rosenberg said that he recalled telling Comey it was
a "52-48 call," but that he went back and forth on whether the "52"
weighed in favor of or against doing the statement.

**F. Comey's Decision Not to Inform the Department**

As described above, documents and testimony indicate that Comey planned
to do the statement independently without advance notice to the
Department even before the tarmac meeting between Lynch and former
President Bill Clinton. Comey acknowledged that he made a conscious
decision not to tell Department leadership about his plans to
independently announce a declination because he was concerned that they
would instruct him not to do it, and that he made this decision when he
first conceived of the idea to do the statement. He stated:

The, come May, and I'm trying to figure out how the endgame should work,
to preserve the option that I ended up concluding was best suited to
protect the institutions, I couldn't tell them that I was considering
that. Because if I told them that one of the---in my mind I drew this
spectrum---at one end of the spectrum is I'm going to announce separate
from you what the FBI thinks about this and very practical about it
they, I remember thinking this, if I surface that with them, they might
well say, I order you not to do that and then I would abide that, I
wouldn't do that.

And so I remember saying to the Midyear team when I circulated in May my
first draft I said what would the most, one end of the spectrum, what
would that option look like? I said keep this close hold, I mean you can
have conversations with the Department of Justice about the endgame, but
don't tell them I'm considering this because then that option is going
from us. Because if I were the DAG, maybe they wouldn't have, but what I
was thinking was, if I'm the DAG I say, just to be clear, I order you
not to make any statements on this case without coordinating it with us.
And so to be honest, I would lose that option.

Asked whether he owed it to Department leadership to inform them of what
he was thinking so that they could make a decision on behalf of the
Department, Comey stated, "In a normal circumstance, sure." He explained
that the Midyear investigation was not a normal circumstance:

To my mind, the peril to the Department, including the FBI, was so
extraordinary, the potential for damage to the institution, that I
needed to preserve that option.. And so look I, everything about this
is unprecedented and God willing no Director will ever face this
circumstance, but I thought that to protect the institution I care about
so much, I have to preserve that option. Of course, in a normal
circumstance it's the right of the Attorney General and Deputy Attorney
General to make those decisions and the FBI Director should tell them,
but this was not the normal circumstance.

Comey told the OIG that he did not credibly think that Lynch and Yates
were going to stop him when he informed them about his plans on the
morning of his press conference, and that he wrestled with whether to
tell them at all.

**IV. June 27, 2016 Tarmac Meeting and Aftermath**

**A. Meeting between Lynch and Former President Clinton**

**1. How the Meeting Came About**

On June 27, 2016, Lynch flew to Phoenix as the first stop in a week-long
community policing tour.^[^131^](#fn131){#fnref131 .footnote-ref}^
Traveling with her were her husband, her Deputy Chief of Staff, a senior
counselor to the AG (Senior Counselor), a supervisor in the Department's
Office of Public Affairs (OPA Supervisor), and another Department
official. Lynch told the OIG that her plane landed several hours late,
and they arrived in Phoenix around 7 p.m. local time. According to
Department witnesses, Lynch's staff left the plane first and boarded the
staff van. Lynch remained on the plane with her husband and the head of
her security detail, and waited to get off the plane until her motorcade
was ready. The OPA Supervisor explained that this practice is standard
FBI protocol and is intended to leave the Attorney General "out in the
open for the least amount of time."

Approximately 20 to 30 yards from Lynch's plane was a private plane with
former President Bill Clinton on it. Former President Clinton had been
in Phoenix for several campaign events, including a roundtable
discussion with Latino leaders and a campaign fundraiser, and his plane
was preparing to depart. Former President Clinton said that he did not
know in advance that Lynch was in Phoenix and was not aware that her
plane was close to his until his staff told him. Asked about news
reports that he purposely delayed his takeoff to speak to Lynch, former
President Clinton stated:

It's absolutely not true. I literally didn't know she was there until
somebody told me she was there. And we looked out the window and it was
really close and all of her staff was unloading, so I thought she's
about to get off and I'll just go shake hands with her when she gets
off. I don't want her to think I'm afraid to shake hands with her
because she's the Attorney General.

He said that he discussed with his Chief of Staff whether he should say
hello to Lynch, and that they debated whether he should do it because of
"all the hoopla" in the campaign. He stated, "I just wanted to say hello
to her and I thought it would look really crazy if we were living in
a world where I couldn't shake hands with the Attorney General
you know when she was right there."

Former President Clinton said that he did not consider that meeting with
Lynch might impact the investigation into his wife's use of a private
email server. He stated, "Well what I didn't want to do is to look like
I was having some big huddle-up session with her you know..
Because it was a paranoid time, but.I knew what I believed to be
the truth of that whole thing. It was after all my server and the FBI
knew it was there and the Secret Service approved it coming in and she
just used what was mine." As a result, he said that he never thought the
investigation "amounted to much frankly so I didn't probably take it as
seriously as maybe I might have in this unusual period."

Former President Clinton said that he recalled walking toward Lynch's
plane with his Chief of Staff, and that Lynch and her staff were
"getting off the airplane." He said that he greeted Lynch, who was on
the plane, and Lynch stated, "Look it's a 100 degrees out there,
come up and we'll talk about our grandkids."

The Senior Counselor told the OIG that she was waiting in the van with
the three other Department employees on the trip, and she saw two people
walking toward Lynch's plane. She said that as the two people went up
the stairs to the plane, she realized that one of them was former
President Clinton. The Senior Counselor said that she saw the head of
Lynch's security detail turn away the second person at the door and
allow former President Clinton to board the plane. Other witnesses
recalled that former President Clinton had additional staff members with
him, and that these people did not board the plane.

The Deputy Chief of Staff said that she had "zero knowledge" that former

President Clinton was there before she saw him approach the plane. She
stated, "And if I had knowledge, I would not have been in that van. I
would've.stayed on the plane and got everybody off.. No heads up
or anything." The Senior Counselor said she asked everyone in the van if
they knew that former President Clinton was going to be there, and they
all said no. The OPA Supervisor said that he later learned that former
President Clinton's Secret Service detail had contacted Lynch's FBI
security detail and let them know that the former President wanted to
meet with Lynch. Although Lynch's staff was supposed to receive notice
of such requests, witnesses told us that they were not informed of the
request from former

President Clinton.^[^132^](#fn132){#fnref132 .footnote-ref}^

Lynch said that she was on the plane with her husband and the head of
her security detail, and that they were preparing to leave when she
learned that former President Clinton had asked to speak to her. She
stated:

We were walking toward the front door, and then.the head of my
detail stopped and spoke to someone outside the plane, turned around and
said former President Clinton is here, and he wants to say hello to you.
And I think my initial reaction was the profound statement, what?
Something like that. And he repeated that. And he spoke again to someone
outside the plane. And we were, we were about to walk off the plane. We
were going to go down the stairs and get into the motorcade and go on,
and.the head of my detail said.can he come on and say hello to
you? And I said, yes, he can come on the plane and say hello. And he was
literally there. So I don't know if he was talking to President Clinton
or somebody else. I don't know who was on the steps.

Lynch said that former President Clinton boarded the plane in a matter
of seconds, suggesting that he was in the stairwell near the door to the
plane. Lynch said that she was very surprised that he wanted to meet
with her because they did not have a social relationship, and she was
also surprised to see him "right there in the doorway so quickly."

Lynch said that she had "never really had a conversation" with former

President Clinton before this meeting, or with former Secretary Clinton
at any time. She said that "years ago" when she was the U.S. Attorney
for the Eastern District of New York, she saw former Secretary Clinton
at a 9/11 event and said hello.^[^133^](#fn133){#fnref133
.footnote-ref}^ She said that she also saw both of them at the funeral
for former Vice President Joe Biden's son, Beau Biden, which was held on
June 6, 2015. She said that she recalled that during that conversation
former President Clinton congratulated her on the FIFA corruption case.
Lynch told the OIG that she did not have a social relationship or
socialize with either former President Clinton or former Secretary
Clinton.

However, Lynch said that public officials often stopped her to say hello
when she traveled, and that as a result she was not initially concerned
when former President Clinton wanted to say hello. For example, Lynch
told us that Ohio Governor John Kasich, who was a candidate in the 2016
Republican presidential primary, stopped her one time to say hello in an
airport, and they had a 10-minute conversation even though they had
never met before. The OPA Supervisor told the OIG, "It wouldn't be
uncommon for Lynch to.match courtesy with courtesy regardless of
whether the person was Republican, Democrat, whatever."

**2. Discussion between Former President Clinton and Lynch**

During our review, we found no contemporaneous evidence, such as notes,
documenting the substance of the discussion between Lynch and former
President Clinton. The only documentary evidence we identified that
summarized the meeting were "talking points" created by Lynch's staff
after the meeting became a subject of controversy, as discussed in
Section IV.B.

Former President Clinton and Lynch denied that they discussed the
Midyear investigation, the upcoming interview of former Secretary
Clinton, any other Department investigation, or plans for Lynch to serve
in some capacity in a Hillary Clinton administration. We summarize below
what they told us about their discussion.

*Former President Clinton's Testimony*

Former President Clinton told us that he congratulated Lynch on being
named Attorney General and mentioned several things that she had done
that he thought were good policy, such as continuing with criminal
justice reforms that were implemented by former Attorney General Eric
Holder. He said that they then talked about their grandchildren, his
recent visit to see former Attorney General Janet Reno, and his golf
game.

We asked former President Clinton if he had discussed Brexit or West
Virginia coal policy with Lynch. He said he did not recall Brexit coming
up, but acknowledged that he probably did discuss it with her because he
was very worried that it would disrupt the Irish peace
process.^[^134^](#fn134){#fnref134 .footnote-ref}^ When asked whether
his comments included the potential implications of the Brexit vote and
the rise of populism for the U.S. election, he stated that he did not
remember discussing that, but that one of his "automatic responses"
during the campaign was to describe how the press had underestimated the
reaction to globalization and the resulting identity crisis, and how
Brexit was simply a manifestation of that. As a result, he said he could
not rule out that he said something similar to Lynch. Former President
Clinton also said that he did not recall mentioning West Virginia coal
policy to Lynch, but that he would not be shocked if he had done so
because he thought a lot about it, and he frequently talked about the
issue.

Former President Clinton said he did not recall telling Lynch that she
was doing a great job, but told us he probably did so because "the
Justice

Department.when President Obama was there, I thought they did a lot
of good things that needed doing, especially in criminal justice."
However, he denied that his comments were motivated by an intent to
influence the investigation. He told us that he did not recall telling
Lynch that she was his favorite cabinet member, and he did not think it
was likely that he would have made such a comment. He stated, "I like
her, but I'm very close to Tom Vilsack and was very close to a couple of
the others, so I couldn't have said that, but I do like her a lot."

Former President Clinton said he only mentioned former Secretary Clinton
once during the discussion, and that concerned how happy she was to be a
grandmother. He said he told Lynch:

That she was a happy grandmother and an ardent one and that we were
very lucky because our daughter and her husband and our grandchildren
live in New York, so they are about an hour from us in a decent traffic
day. And I told her that before the campaign was underway Hillary and I
tried to see our grandkids every week and in the best weeks, she would
see them once when she was down there. Then I would see them once and
then we'd see them once together and I was down, and I remember talking
about every now and then we got them up in Chappaqua where we live and
it was quite bracing trying to keep up with them and how much fun it was
and that's really what we talked about.

I do remember saying that grandparents typically say it's better than
being a parent because it's all the fun and none of the
responsibilities, and I told Chelsea once after her daughter was
born that she would never hear me say that, that I still thought being
her father was the best gig I ever had.

When asked whether they discussed former Secretary Clinton's upcoming
interview with the FBI, Clinton replied, "Absolutely not.. It
wouldn't have been appropriate for me to talk to her about any of that
and I didn't." He said that they also did not discuss the Midyear
investigation, the Clinton Foundation matter, any other Department
investigation, the Benghazi hearings held by Congress, or then FBI
Director Comey.

We asked former President Clinton whether he discussed the possibility
of Lynch serving as Attorney General or in another position in a future
Hillary Clinton administration, or a possible judicial nomination. He
stated:

No. Not even with anybody else. Not with Hillary. Not with anybody..
We didn't discuss that because.I'm very superstitious. I never
discuss anything like that. I want everybody to focus on the matter at
hand and I thought the environment was much more volatile than a lot of
people did.

Former President Clinton also said that he was a little surprised by the
criticism after his tarmac meeting with Lynch. He stated:

The mainstream media wasn't as bad on that as they were on a lot of
things, I thought, I think the ones that were criticizing me, I thought
you know, I don't know whether I'm more offended that they think I'm
crooked or that they think I'm stupid. I've got an idea, I'll do all
these things they accuse me of doing in broad daylight in an airport in
Phoenix when the whole world can see it in front of an Air Force One
crew and I believe one of her security guards. It was an interesting
proposition, but no we did not.

*Lynch's Testimony*

As described above, Lynch said the head of her security detail told her
that former President Clinton wanted to speak to her, and she said that
he could come on the plane and say hello. Lynch told the OIG that she
thought that she and former President Clinton would briefly exchange
greetings, and then she would get off the plane. She described what
happened after he boarded the plane:

Well first we're.standing in the.the cabin of the plane because,
again, he's saying he wanted to say hello. I introduce him to my
husband. We were standing up, because I thought we were going to stand
up, say hello, and then keep walking. There were two members of the
flight crew in the back section of the plane. So, President Clinton
shook hands with the head of my detail, with my husband, with me. He
went back and spoke to the two members of the flight crew, and he stayed
back there for a few minutes, like five minutes maybe, because he spoke
individually to each of them for a few minutes.. And they were very
excited, you know.. He was very gracious to them.

Lynch said that former President Clinton then returned to the front of
the plane where she and her husband were standing and began talking to
her husband. She said they had a brief discussion about Lynch's trip to
Phoenix, Clinton's new grandchild, and various family issues including
how to deal with sibling rivalry. She said they were still standing
during this discussion, but that former President Clinton sat down after
a few minutes:

At some point, after two or three minutes, President Clinton turned
around. I had my tote bags on the bench seat of the plane, because I had
put them there when he came on board. I had been holding them. I put
them down. He picked up my tote bags and moved them, and then he sat
down. So he sat down, and my husband and I were still standing in front
of him having the discussion. And.he sort of sat heavily, and.I
didn't know.how he felt, so I can't say one way or the other. But he
sat down and started talking about, you know, the grandkids and how they
introduced them to each other. And so, and ultimately, because this went
on for a little but, my husband and I sat down also, and, you know, had
that discussion about his family and the kids.

She said that after this, the discussion continued, with former
President Clinton doing most of the talking. She stated:

Well, after he was sharing with us his story about how.they
introduced the two grandchildren to each other, which involved a
toy.and that was green, and just, again, the family issues, he said
what brings you to Phoenix. And I said I'm here on a police tour, and
I'm doing a lot about the law enforcement community relations. And I
said, you know, how did you find Phoenix? And he mentioned that he had
been there for several meetings, he had played golf. I made a reference
to the heat, because it was still incredibly hot while we landed, which
was why we were still on the plane.

And he made a comment about playing golf, and you can manage the heat.
Just, he was talking a lot about the golfing issue was well, but nothing
of substance about that. And he asked about my travels, and I said that
I had been recently traveling to China. I had to come back for the Pulse
Nightclub shooting. I had been to Alaska and met with Native youth.
I then said.you know, that was an issue of great importance to
former Attorney General Janet Reno. Have you talked with her lately
and do you know about her health? And he said, yes, I've seen her. I
visited her along with Donna Shalala, I visited her, and he told me
when. And I said because she's not doing well. We talked about that for
a few minutes.

And I remember at that point saying, well, you know, thank you very much
kind of thing, and he sort of continued chatting and, and said, and made
a comment about his travels he was headed on. And I said, well, we've
got to get going to the hotel. And I said I'm sure you've got somewhere
to, to go. And he said yes. And I forget where he told me he was going.
He was flying somewhere, but.I've forgotten where. He said I'm going
to wherever I'm off to. And then he made some comment about West
Virginia. And I do not know if he was headed to West Virginia. I just
don't know.if that was the reference to it. And he made a.comment
about West Virginia and coal issues and how their problems really stem
from policies that were set forth in 1932. And he talked about those
policies for a while. And, and I said, okay, well.

According to Lynch, Clinton discussed West Virginia coal policy as an
historical issue, not in connection with the campaign. She said that he
discussed Brexit in a similar context, talking about the cultural issues
that led to the decision and whether "people in the UK viewed themselves
as citizens of the world or the country or whatever."

In response to specific questions asked by the OIG, Lynch said that she
and former President Clinton did not discuss the Midyear investigation
or any other Department investigation, James Comey, Donald Trump, or the
upcoming

Presidential election. She said that they also did not discuss possible
positions for her in a future Hillary Clinton administration, a
potential nomination to the Supreme Court, or her future plans after
President Obama left office.

Lynch said that Clinton told her that she was "doing a great job as a
cabinet member or.words to that effect." She said that she thought
that he was flattering her and "would have said that to every cabinet
member at that time. No, I, I viewed it as.him being jovial,
honestly, and being genial."

Lynch estimated that she talked to former President Clinton for
approximately 20 minutes before a member of her staff came back onto the
plane, as we describe below. She said that she became increasingly
concerned as the meeting "went on and on." Lynch said that when she
thought about it later that evening and discussed it with her staff
about in the context of the case, she concluded "that it was just too
long a conversation to have had. It.went beyond hi, how are you,
shake hands, move on sort of thing. It went beyond the discussions I've
had with other people in public life, even in political life, it went
beyond that in terms of length."

**3. Intervention by Lynch's Staff**

While former President Clinton was on the plane, Lynch's staff were
waiting in the staff van. The Deputy Chief of Staff said that they
quickly realized that the meeting was problematic, because Clinton was
not just the former President but was also the husband of someone who
was under investigation. The Deputy Chief of Staff said that she felt
"shocked," and that they all "just felt completely.blindsided." The
Senior Counselor said that they immediately were aware that the meeting
was ill-advised and that the "optics were not great."

The OPA Supervisor said that he waited approximately 5 minutes, and then
he left the van. He said he went over to one of the other agents on
Lynch's security detail, who was waiting in the vehicle that was going
to carry Lynch. The OPA Supervisor said that he asked the agent what was
going on, whether there had been any notice that former President
Clinton wanted to say hello, and how long he was supposed to be on the
plane. The OPA Supervisor said that the agent did not know. According to
the OPA Supervisor, he asked the agent to tell the head of Lynch's
security detail that Lynch needed to end the meeting. The OPA Supervisor
stated, "And I don't know that the head of Lynch's security detail
thought it was appropriate to ask her to wrap it up because I guess
that's his boss too."

The OPA Supervisor said that there was a photographer outside, and he
recalled telling the photographer that Lynch would not be taking
pictures. The OPA Supervisor said that he remembered telling the
photographer that he (the photographer) needed to go back in his car.
The OPA Supervisor stated, "I'm going back in my car. Like, no one is
hanging out. I like President Clinton, too. I'm not hanging out for a
photo." The OPA Supervisor said that he then got back in the staff
van.^[^135^](#fn135){#fnref135 .footnote-ref}^

By this time, former President Clinton had been on the plane for
approximately 10 to 15 minutes. The Deputy Chief of Staff said that they
were discussing the need for someone to go back on the plane when the
Senior Counselor, who led the Phoenix portion of the trip and therefore
was seated in the front of the van closest to the door, told the group
that she was going to go and jumped out of the van. The Deputy Chief of
Staff said, "And then the Senior Counselor was just running
upstairs. And so, that's how---that's when we decided.to do
something." The Senior Counselor described her thinking at the time:
"And I don't know what's going on up there, but I should at least go up
to intervene or help her if she needs help.. I think.it was part
uncertainty and part kind of like this is a bad idea."

The Senior Counselor said that when she tried to go back on the plane,
she was stopped by the head of Lynch's security detail, who was at the
door of the plane. The Senior Counselor said that she told him that
Lynch's meeting with former President Clinton was not a good idea, and
that she needed to get back on the plane, but he still would not let her
on. The Senior Counselor said that she then asked him to convey to Lynch
that she was advising that the meeting was a bad idea. According to the
Senior Counselor, he told her, "All right, why don't you tell her
yourself," and finally allowed her to board.

The Senior Counselor said that when she got on the plane, she saw Lynch,
Lynch's husband, and former President Clinton sitting down and
"chatting.in a casual way." The Senior Counselor said that she walked
up to the three of them and stood there hoping that her presence would
break up the meeting. She said that Lynch saw her and introduced her to
former President Clinton, and she shook his hand. The Senior Counselor
said that she hoped this would get everyone moving, but then former
President Clinton sat back down. The Senior Counselor stated, "So
then.I kind of didn't know what to do because.it was a little bit
unusual to be in a room with.a former president and say.you need
to leave.. So.I think I stared at them for a little bit longer,
and then went back to where the head of Lynch's security detail was
standing." The Senior Counselor said that she considered whether she
should go get someone else or go back over to Lynch and tell her, "Look,
ma'am, we have to go." She said she then went and stood in front of the
group again.

The Senior Counselor said that her presence prompted Lynch to tell
former President Clinton that the reason she (the Senior Counselor) was
standing there was that she was too polite to tell Lynch that they had
to go. The Senior Counselor said that Lynch told former President
Clinton, "And we do have to go. You know.we have a pretty busy
schedule." The Senior Counselor said that she could not recall what
Lynch and former President Clinton were discussing, but that her
impression was that Lynch was "uncomfortable and wanted the meeting to
be done."

Lynch said that after the Senior Counselor got back on the plane, former
President Clinton commented, "Oh, she's mad at me, because I'd been on
the plane too long. And she's come to get you." Lynch said that she
replied to him, "Well, we do have to go. And then he kept talking
about something else." She said that he kept talking for "a good 5
minutes" after the Senior Counselor got back on the plane. Lynch said
that she finally stood up and said, "You know, it was very nice of
you to come. Thank you so much. And just.thank you again for stopping
by." She said that they said goodbye several times, and her husband
shook former President Clinton's hand again. Former President Clinton
then left the plane.

The Senior Counselor said she went to talk to Lynch after former
President Clinton left. She stated, "And I kind of looked at her
and.I think I said.something like that was not great,
or.something like that. And she's like, yeah." She described Lynch as
"looking kind of.gray and, you know, not pleased." The Senior
Counselor said that after they left the plane, she got into the staff
van, Lynch got into her vehicle, and they went to the hotel. She said
that they did not talk to Lynch about what happened until the next day.

The Deputy Chief of Staff told the OIG that they did not attempt to get
information from the head of Lynch's security detail about the
conversation that took place on the plane. She explained:

And my only conversation with the head of Lynch's security detail
was a rare, fairly admonishing one.just saying, this is not okay,
this shouldn't be the protocol; you didn't contact me; you could've
radioed your FBI guy in the van to say, send someone up. So.my
conversation was not a very pleasant one by the time I talked to the
head of Lynch's security detail. So I didn't ask questions like, oh,
what did you hear. I was just like, we need to figure this out, and this
never needs to happen again.

The Deputy Chief of Staff said that the security protocol was changed
almost immediately as the result of what happened. Under the revised
protocol, the senior counselor (*i.e.*, the staff member in charge of
the trip) was required to remain on the plane with Lynch and the head of
her security detail, and to escort her at other times.

B. Responding to Media Questions about the Tarmac Meeting
---------------------------------------------------------

Melanie Newman, the Director of OPA, said that the OPA Supervisor called
her from the van and "sounded the alarm," telling her that he just saw
former President Clinton board Lynch's plane. According to Newman, she
asked the OPA Supervisor a number of questions, including why former
President Clinton was there and whether he had a press pool with them,
which he could not answer. Newman said that she asked the OPA Supervisor
to get out of the van and figure out what was going on. Newman said that
she was not just concerned that there was a

press event going on that they did not know about, but that the
potential implications for the investigation were obvious to everyone
"except apparently the

FBI agents on the Attorney General's detail."

Newman said that the OPA Supervisor called her back approximately 30
minutes later, after the Senior Counselor had returned to the van.
According to

Newman, the OPA Supervisor told her that there was no press pool, but
that former

President Clinton had his own photographer there. Newman said that the
OPA Supervisor told her that former President Clinton had asked Lynch's
FBI detail if he could go on Lynch's plane, and no one had communicated
this to her staff. Newman stated, "No one talks to the AG without staff
saying they can talk to the

AG. But they didn't do this because he's a former
President."^[^136^](#fn136){#fnref136 .footnote-ref}^

Newman said she spoke to Lynch and the staff traveling with her by phone
the next day, June 28, 2016. According to Newman, during this call Lynch
described how the meeting with former President Clinton happened, what
they discussed, and how she had tried to end the discussion. Newman
characterized Lynch as "devastated" about the tarmac meeting. She
stated:

Lynch doesn't take mistakes lightly, and she felt like she had
made.an incredible.mistake in judgment by saying yes instead of
no, that he could come on the plane. But also, she's like the most
polite, Southern person alive. I, I don't know in what circumstances she
would have said no, or what would have happened if she had said no..
I would have much preferred a story that the Attorney General turned a
former President of the United States away on the tarmac, but.she
doesn't make mistakes, and she was not pleased with herself for making
this kind of high-stakes mistake.

Newman said that they discussed the best way to respond to any press
questions about the meeting. She said that Lynch had a press conference
scheduled in Phoenix, so she (Newman) wanted to have talking points
prepared in case someone asked about the meeting with former President
Clinton.

At approximately 1:15 p.m. EDT, Newman received an email from an ABC
News reporter asking about the meeting between Lynch and former
President Clinton, based on information from its Phoenix affiliate.
Newman said that this inquiry confirmed that the meeting would come up
at Lynch's press conference, and she sped up the process to develop
talking points. Newman forwarded the inquiry to the OPA Supervisor and
Lynch's Acting Chief of Staff stating, "We need to talk."

The Acting Chief of Staff arranged a conference call, and added Matt
Axelrod, the Deputy Chief of Staff, and the Senior Counselor to the list
of invitees. However, the OPA Supervisor and the Senior Counselor were
waiting for an event in Phoenix to begin and could not join the call.
Following the call, Newman emailed a short draft statement to the Senior
Counselor and the Deputy Chief of Staff, copying Axelrod, the Acting
Chief of Staff, the OPA Supervisor, and Peter Kadzik, the AAG for the
Office of Legislative Affairs (OLA). A number of additional emails and
phone calls followed as the draft statement was expanded and edited to
include talking points about the topics Lynch and former President
Clinton discussed. Newman then emailed the statement to Lynch and her
staff.

During Lynch's Phoenix press conference, a local reporter asked Lynch
about her meeting with former President Clinton and whether Benghazi was
discussed. She answered the question based on the talking points and
draft statement:

No. Actually, while I was landing at the airport, I did see President
Clinton at the Phoenix airport as I was leaving, and he spoke to myself
and my husband on the plane. Our conversation was a great deal about his
grandchildren. It was primarily social and about our travels. He
mentioned the golf he played in Phoenix, and he mentioned travels he'd
had in West Virginia. We talked about former Attorney General Janet
Reno, for example, whom we both know, but there was no discussion of any
matter pending before the Department or any matter pending before any
other body. There was no discussion of Benghazi, no discussion of the
State Department emails, by way of example. I would say the current news
of the day was the Brexit decision, and what that might mean. And again,
the Department's not involved in that or implicated in that.

Lynch did not receive any follow up questions from either the reporter
who asked the question or from the other reporters in attendance.

Based on the lack of follow up questions, Newman decided not to release
a statement about Lynch's meeting with former President Clinton.
However, by the following afternoon, several media organizations had
begun picking up coverage of the meeting.

On June 29, 2016, Newman emailed Lynch's statement at her Phoenix press
conference and the Department's talking points to two officials in the
FBI's Office of Public Affairs (OPA), stating, "I want to flag a story
that is gaining some traction tonight.about a casual, unscheduled
meeting between former President Bill Clinton and the AG." The FBI
OPA officials forwarded the talking points to McCabe, Rybicki, and
Comey. We discuss the impact of the tarmac meeting on Comey's decision
not to tell the Department about his decision to do a public statement
in Section IV.E below.

**C. Discussions about Possible Recusal**

**1. Departmental Ethics Opinion**

Lynch told the OIG that she began discussing whether she needed to
recuse herself from the Midyear investigation on June 28, 2016, the
morning after the tarmac incident. Lynch said that she called her Acting
Chief of Staff, who was back in Washington, D.C., and asked her to
contact the Departmental Ethics Office to find out if the ethics
regulations required recusal. Lynch said (and the Acting Chief of Staff
confirmed) that she obtained an oral ethics opinion that there was no
legal requirement to recuse herself.

Janice Rodgers, the former Director of the Departmental Ethics Office,
said that she remembered receiving a call from someone on Lynch's staff,
although she did not remember who it was. Rodgers said that she spoke to
Lynch's staff member over the phone, and after hearing what happened,
concluded that the ethics regulations did not require recusal. Rodgers
explained her understanding of the facts:

The fact that the subject's spouse had, I don't know what the right
word is. You know, sort of created, engineered a, you know, contact with
the AG, which was apparently, you know, completely nonsubstantive, and
in my view. And also in circumstances that made it very difficult for
the AG to decline or avoid contact.

Rodgers said that the question was "more of.a capital-P political
issue.meaning people were going to make hay of it," and that
Department leadership would have to weigh the amount of heat they were
willing to take versus the importance of Lynch's participation in the
matter. She stated, "There was nothing about that that required
recusal.. Whether the AG chose to recuse based on sort of the
more.global considerations was.out of my bailiwick."

**2. Discussions about Voluntary Recusal**

Lynch said that she then considered whether she should recuse
voluntarily based on appearance concerns---*i.e.*, concerns that the
meeting created the appearance that former President Clinton was
influencing the Midyear investigation through her, or that she was
influencing it by having a connection to him. Lynch said she wanted to
be able to make a statement about her plans for remaining involved in
the Midyear investigation during an interview with a Washington Post
reporter at the Aspen Ideas Festival, which was scheduled for the last
day of her trip, July 1, 2016.

Lynch said she held a number of calls that involved Yates, Axelrod,
Newman, the Acting Chief of Staff, and other Department officials, and
that these calls likely took place on the Wednesday or Thursday of that
week. She said she also discussed the issue with the staff members who
were traveling with her. Lynch said that she did not recall anyone
expressing the view that she should recuse herself; she said that her
staff raised issues and concerns for discussion, but no one presented
her with a conclusion that she should recuse.

*Discussions Involving Yates, Axelrod, and Other Department Officials*

Yates told the OIG that the group participating in these calls quickly
dismissed the idea of recusal because they knew that the Department was
going to announce what they expected to be a declination "in a matter of
days." She stated:

And the fear was that this is going to look really artificial.if
you've spent over a year with Lynch at the helm of this
investigating it, and then this tarmac thing happens and she
recuses.. That's going to look really artificial then if all of a
sudden somebody else is announcing it and we're saying oh, there's no
problem with the tarmac because she's recused. When really that decision
had been all but made.while she was AG.

Axelrod expressed a similar opinion, and stated that other factors
weighed against recusal as well. In particular, he said that he
understood that Lynch had not discussed anything improper with former
President Clinton, and for her to recuse would have made it look like
she had. He said he also thought that the people calling for her recusal
would not be satisfied by it:

I thought that for folks who had already, again, for.political
reasons been calling for a special counsel I wasn't sure that a
recusal.would be sufficient. That it would end there with.the AG
stepping aside and the DAG taking over. I thought calls would increase
for Department leadership to step out altogether. Which again, I didn't
think was good for the integrity of the investigation. And that was my
goal was to protect the integrity of the investigation.

Axelrod told the OIG that he did not specifically recall having a
discussion with Rybicki or McCabe about the tarmac incident, but said
that he was "sure he did have conversations.. This would be a
big thing not to have a conversation about." Rybicki told us that
Axelrod called him early in the week to tell him that the tarmac meeting
had happened. McCabe said that he also spoke to Axelrod a day or two
after the tarmac meeting, and that Axelrod told him that Lynch likely
would not recuse herself from the Midyear investigation.

Toscas said he was on vacation the week of the tarmac meeting, and
Axelrod contacted him by phone to tell him about it. Toscas said that he
contacted Laufman, and that both he and Laufman thought that recusal was
unwise. Toscas stated, "I thought that a recusal would make it look
like, oh this person who is doing inappropriate things has been
overseeing this thing for a long time now, so that means the whole thing
is tainted by it.. That would actually probably be more harmful
to our investigation and the appearance to the public of our
investigation."

*Lynch's Decision Not to Recuse*

Lynch said that she decided not to recuse herself from the Midyear
investigation. In making this decision, Lynch said she considered
whether her meeting with former President Clinton would cause people not
to have faith in the judgment or decisions of the Department. She said
she weighed this against the concern that stepping aside would create a
misimpression that she and former President Clinton had discussed
inappropriate topics, or that her role in the case somehow was greater
than it was.

She explained that other considerations informed her decision:

And I, and I also had the view that, you know, when you create a
situation, as I felt I did by sitting down with, with the President,
it's, yes, it can be almost a relief in some ways to say, you know what?
I'm going to recuse myself and get out of it and not take, not take the
hits. And then you're just asking someone else to step up and endure all
the hits the Department will take for the case for the result, whatever
it is.

And, you know, I thought about it from that, that angle as well.

You're just asking someone else to step up and do your job for you. And
if I did not think it rose to the level of recusal, then I did not want
to do something out of a desire to protect myself sort of personally
from embarrassment also because that's not the way to make somebody else
take on that responsibility.

Lynch said that she took into account that NSD did not think recusal was
necessary. She said she conveyed her regrets to the Midyear prosecutors
for putting them in the position of having people outside the Department
look at their work and think that it would be influenced by anything
improper.

*Planning for the Aspen Interview*

Axelrod told the OIG that the "game plan" that emerged from these
discussions was for Lynch to explain publicly how the Midyear
investigation had been handled all along:

- It was handled by career agents and prosecutors;
- The career agents and prosecutors had been the ones doing the work
    for more than a year;
- When the career agents and prosecutors finished their work, they
    would make a recommendation to Department leadership; and
- When Lynch received that recommendation, she fully expected to
    accept it, but she ultimately was the decider.

Axelrod said it was "definitely not the game plan" for Lynch to convey
that she would accept the recommendation of the career staff no matter
what they brought her, or that she would take herself out of the
decisionmaking process but not formally recuse herself. However, he
acknowledged that the different ways she described this process in her
interview with the Washington Post reporter (discussed below) led to
some confusion.

Carlin spoke at the Aspen Ideas Festival before Lynch arrived and said
he was scheduled to return to Washington, D.C., with her. Carlin said
that he met with Lynch, her husband, and her staff in person before her
interview with the Washington Post reporter, and Carlin conveyed to her
that NSD was not making a request that she recuse herself. Carlin said
they also discussed what Lynch planned to say in her interview. Like
Axelrod, Carlin told us that Lynch intended to provide more insight than
she normally would into the investigative process, not to communicate
that something had changed because of the tarmac incident.

Melanie Newman told the OIG that she made it known that she disagreed
with this approach from a messaging perspective. Newman said that she
thought recusal was appropriate because public statements and actions
"need to be clear-cut." Newman stated:

We tried to have it both ways.. We said that she would accept
the recommendation of the senior career prosecutors and investigators on
the case. Well, usually that is what the Attorney General does anyway.
That means literally nothing..

This is the Attorney General, I mean, I'm not aware of, there may be
disputes in other cases between the FBI and the prosecutors that
the Attorney General is sort of the deciding vote. But generally
speaking, in charging decisions, the Attorney General accepts the
recommendation of those people who know the evidence most intimately. I
think in the rare instance that there are disagreements, the Attorney
General may, may accept the recommendation of one over the other, for
example. But that's, that's sort of what they do.

Newman said that Lynch was doing the same thing that she usually does,
except that "she was saying before the conclusion of the investigation
that this was how she was going to handle it. That was the difference."

**D. Lynch's July 1 Aspen Institute Statement**

During the interview with the Washington Post reporter, Lynch
acknowledged that her meeting with former President Clinton raised
questions about her role in the Midyear investigation. Addressing how
that investigation would be resolved, Lynch stated:

But I think the issue is, again, what is my role in how that matter is
going to be resolved? And so let me be clear on how that is going to be
resolved. I've gotten that question a lot also over time and we usually
don't go into those deliberations, but I do think it's important that
people see what that process is like.

As I have always indicated, the matter is being handled by career agents
and investigators with the Department of Justice. They've had it since
the beginning. They are independent.. It predates my tenure as
Attorney General. It is the same team and they are acting independently.
They follow the law, they follow the facts. That team will make
findings. That is to say they will come up with a chronology of what
happened, the factual scenario. They will make recommendations as to how
to resolve what those facts lead to. Those---the recommendations will be
reviewed by career supervisors in the Department of Justice and in the
FBI and by the FBI Director. And then, as is the common process, they
present it to me and I fully expect to accept their recommendations.

Lynch then responded to a question about a news article that morning
reporting that she planned to recuse herself from the Midyear
investigation. She stated, "Well, a recusal would mean that I wouldn't
even be briefed on what the findings were or what the actions going
forward would be. And while I don't have a role in those findings and
coming up with those findings or making those recommendations as to how
to go forward, I'll be briefed on it and I will be accepting their
recommendations."

As the discussion continued, Lynch responded to additional questions
about her continued role in Midyear. Asked about a news report that she
had made the decision in April 2016 to accept the recommendations of the
career staff, Lynch replied:

Yes, I had already determined that that would be the process.. And as
I've said on occasions as to why we don't talk about ongoing
investigations in terms of what's being discussed and who's being
interviewed, is to preserve the integrity of that investigation. We also
typically don't talk about the process by which we make decisions, and I
have provided that response too.

But in this situation, you know, because I did have that meeting, it has
raised concerns, I feel, and I feel that while I can certainly say this
matter's going to be handled like any other, as it has always been, it's
going to be resolved like any other, as it was always going to be. I
think people need the information about exactly how that resolution will
come about in order to know what that means and really accept that and
have faith in the ultimate decision of the Department of Justice.

Lynch's comments about the status of her continuing involvement in the
Midyear investigation created considerable confusion. After her
appearance, various new articles reported that she had decided to defer
to the recommendations of the FBI or had effected a "non-recusal
recusal."^[^137^](#fn137){#fnref137 .footnote-ref}^ Lynch said she
participated in a follow-up interview with the Washington Post reporter
during which she attempted to clarify her statement. The resulting
article quoted her as follows:

I can certainly say this matter is going to be handled like any other as
it has always been. It's going to be resolved like any other, as it was
always going to be.. I've always said that this matter will be
handled by the career people who are independent. They live from
administration to administration. Their role is to follow the facts and
follow the law and make a determination as to what happened and what
those next steps should be.. This team is dedicated and professional.
So I can't imagine a circumstance in which I would not be accepting
their recommendations.^[^138^](#fn138){#fnref138 .footnote-ref}^

Lynch told us that her role in oversight of the Midyear investigation
did not change. She stated:

As I said to, to the reporter at the time, that the team is going to
continue and, and do what they needed to do in terms of interviews,
forensics, all the investigative steps that they would take that were
not influenced by me. They would look at all the facts, all the
evidence, and come up with a recommendation that was going to be vetted
through supervisors on both sides of the house, the legal side of the
house, the investigative side of the house, and they would make a
recommendation to me.

Lynch continued:

They are going to present me with a recommendation, that I expect to
accept, which I always expected that I would accept given the people
involved in the process, then there is really no need for me to step
aside from this because I'm, I'm listening to their recommendation. I'm
doing what I'm supposed to do in terms of discharging my duties in
running the Department, in, in managing the Department in what is an
important case and a sensitive case. And, and essentially, there won't
be a change.

**E. Impact of the Tarmac Meeting on Comey's Decision to Make a Public
Statement**

As described above, Comey began drafting a public statement announcing
the conclusion of the Midyear investigation in early May 2016, well
before the tarmac meeting, and told the OIG that he planned not to
inform the Department. Comey told us that he had struggled with the
decision, and that "in a way the tarmac thing made it easy for me" and
"tipped the scales" towards making his mind up to go forward with an
independent announcement. He stated, "I think I was nearly there. That I
have to do this separate and apart.. And so I would say I was 90
percent there, like highly likely going to do it anyway, and the
tarmac meeting capped it."

Comey said that Lynch's decision not to recuse herself and to defer to
his recommendation impacted his decision. He stated:

If you believe the nature, the circumstance, 500-year flood, if you
believe that it's officially unusual that you can't participate
meaningfully in one of the most important investigations in here, in
your organization, then I think your obligation is to find another way
to discharge leadership responsibilities. Either appoint someone within
the organization to be in charge of the case to make sure there is
leadership to engage across the street with us, not to be this neither
fish nor fowl, I'm still the Attorney General and really in an odd way,
what she said explicitly was sort of the culture of the case before the
tarmac thing in that she was not closely involved in the
investigation, which was I'm the Attorney General and that's not
really my thing and then she made it explicit by saying, I'm still the
Attorney General, but I'm going to accept what Jim Comey and the
prosecutors say.

Comey also stated:

Had Loretta said, I'm stepping out of this after the tarmac meeting.
I'm making Sally Yates the acting Attorney General and had I gone and
sat down with Sally and heard her vision for it, maybe we would have
ended up in a different place. I don't know. It's possible we'd end up
in the same place, but it's hard to relive different, imaginary lives.

As described in more detail in Chapter Eight, on October 13, 2016, Comey
gave a speech at the SAC Conference in which he spoke at length about
the Midyear investigation. Comey stated the following regarding the
tarmac meeting in explaining his decision to deliver a unilateral public
statement:

At the end of the investigation, the team's view of it was there
isn't anything that anybody could prosecute. My view was the same.
Everybody between me and the people who worked this case felt the same
way about it. It was not a prosecutable case.. The decision there was
not a prosecutable case here was not a hard one. The hard one, as I've
told you, was how do we communicate about it. I decided to do something
unprecedented that I was very nervous about at the time, and I've asked
myself a thousand times since was it the right decision. I still believe
it was.

Here was the thinking. Especially after the Attorney General met with
former President Clinton on that airplane the week before we
interviewed Hillary Clinton.. The hard part in the wake of the
Attorney General's meeting was what would happen to the FBI if we did
the normal thing? The normal thing would be send over an LHM even if we
didn't write it. Go talk to them. Tell them what we think, tell them
whether we think there's something here or whether we think a
declination makes sense, but all of that would be done privately.

What I said to myself at the time, we talked about it as a leadership
team a lot and all believed that this was the right course, try to
imagine what will happen to the FBI if we do the normal thing. Then what
will happen to us is the Department of Justice will screw around it for
Lord knows how long, issue probably a one sentence declination, and then
the world will catch on fire, and then the cry in the public will be
where on the earth is the FBI, how could the FBI be part of some corrupt
political bargain like this, there's no transparency whatsoever, where
is the FBI, where is the FBI. Then, after a period of many weeks where a
corrosive doubt about us leaks into the public's square, then I'd have
to testify in exactly the way I did before. Our view of it would be
dragged out in that way, in a way I think would've hugely damaging to
us, and frankly, to the Justice Department more broadly and for the
sense of justice in the country more broadly.

**V. July 5, 2016 Press Conference**

**A. Notifications to Department Leadership**

On July 1, 2016, Comey emailed Rybicki a script containing what he
planned to say to Lynch and Yates on the morning of July 5. Entitled
"What I will say Tuesday on phone," the script stated:

I wanted to let you know that I am doing a press conference this morning
announcing the completion of our Midyear investigation and referral of
the matter to DOJ. I'm not going to tell you anything about what I will
say, for reasons I hope you understand. I think it is very important
that I not have coordinated my statement outside the FBI. I'm not going
to take questions at the press conference. When it is over, my staff
will be available to work with your team.

Rybicki told the OIG that Comey wanted to be "very careful" about what
he said on the phone to avoid substantive discussion before the actual
press conference, and that was why he wrote out what he planned to say.
Rybicki said that Comey did not deliver this script verbatim during his
calls to Lynch and Yates, but that it was close to what he actually
said.

Comey and Rybicki also developed a timeline for notifying the media, the
Department, and Congress about the press conference. After notifying the
press pool and sending out a media advisory by 8:00 a.m., Comey planned
to call Yates at 8:30 a.m. and Lynch at 8:35 a.m. After those calls took
place, McCabe, Rybicki, and, Strzok were assigned to call Toscas,
Axelrod, and Laufman, respectively, beginning at 8:30 a.m. The timeline
is set forth below in Figure 4.1.

Figure 6.1: FBI Timeline for Notifications on July 5, 2016
----------------------------------------------------------

![](Pictures/100000000000027B000002424A90064EBC78ACED.jpg)

Emails indicate that the Department first learned about Comey's press
conference as the result of the media notifications on the morning of
July 5, not from Comey or Rybicki. At 8:08 a.m., Melanie Newman sent an
email to Lynch's Acting Chief of Staff, Axelrod, and Lynch's Deputy
Chief of Staff entitled "FBI presser at 11 a.m." This email stated,
"Just heard that the Director is having a press briefing today at 11
a.m. I have not heard anything but have asked for guidance." Axelrod
replied at 8:15 a.m., "I'll call Rybicki." At 8:16 a.m., apparently
after talking to the FBI Office of Public Affairs (OPA), Newman stated,
"The FBI OPA Section Chief says the Director has called the DAG."
Axelrod replied at 8:18 a.m., "Nope." At 8:31 a.m., Axelrod replied
again and stated, "They just spoke. He's going to call the AG too."

Newman emailed Axelrod and Lynch's Acting Chief of Staff with additional
information at 8:33 and 8:43 a.m. She stated in the first email, "For
the record, these notifications to Lynch and Yates are happening
AFTER they notified press. I learned from a reporter that they were
requesting pool coverage---which means they want live TV." In the second
email she stated, "They are also doing an off the record call this
morning."

Newman told the OIG that in the weeks leading up to July 5, she had been
"clamoring" for information from Axelrod about the conclusion of the
investigation so that she could get some sense of the timeline. She said
she had been "hearing from reporters that the investigation was, it
was coming to an end and the FBI was likely to announce something." She
said that Axelrod assured her that the FBI would not announce a
conclusion without the Department, that they were not at the point where
they were ready to announce anything, and that he would tell her when
they were. Newman told the OIG that she did not doubt that Axelrod

"believed this to be true."

Newman said that on the morning of July 5, after she found out from a
reporter that the FBI would hold a press conference that day, she called
the FBI OPA Section Chief to inquire about it and was told, "I can't
tell you what this is about.but I'm sure you can guess." According to
Newman, the Department's OPA had longstanding problems getting
information from FBI OPA, but this was "unprecedented" and "absolutely
ridiculous."

**1. Call to Yates**

Comey said that when he spoke with Yates, he told her he was about to
make a public press statement about the email investigation, including
that the FBI had finished it and was sending it to the Department with
its recommendation. Comey told the OIG that Yates did not say anything
except "thanks for letting me know." According to contemporaneous
emails, both Yates and Axelrod were notified by the FBI by 8:28 a.m.

Yates told us that she remembered Comey saying that he was going to hold
a press conference that morning. She said that she did not recall if
Comey said that it would be about the Clinton investigation, but that
she knew it would be. She stated, "And I remember thinking sort of, what
the heck is this? And hanging up immediately and calling Matt
Axelrod to find out more of what he knew, because if there's ever
anybody who's going to know what's going on it's going to be Matt." She
said that Comey's tone during the call was "very emphatic, I'm not going
to tell you what it is," and that made her determined to find some other
way to find out what Comey planned to say.

Yates said that she and Axelrod assumed that Comey would deliver a very
brief statement that the FBI had concluded the Clinton investigation and
had reached a determination, and possibly would state what the FBI's
recommendation to the Department was going to be. She said that based on
her knowledge of the investigation, they expected that if Comey
announced a recommendation it would be a declination. She stated, "But
we certainly didn't expect what then happened." She said that she
viewed Comey's decision to do a press statement without coordinating
with the Department as problematic, particularly the failure to
coordinate on the content of the statement. We discuss Yates's reaction
to the content of Comey's statement in more detail below.

Axelrod said that he was surprised that Comey had chosen to do an
independent press statement. He said he thought that the statement
should have been "coordinated and planned and discussed" with the
Department. However, at the time, he did not view the fact that Comey
was the one delivering the declination as the primary problem. He
stated:

I think it's important to think about Comey's press conference in two
ways. One was the decision to do it. And then two was.what he said. I
just, one was the decision to do it at all. And on the decision to do it
at all, I mean, we're surprised. We were like completely taken aback.
But you know, again, we had already wanted the FBI to at least be, even
before the tarmac, be part of the public face of this.. Comey
was.about to be the entire public face of it. You know, there were
some upsides and downsides to that. But you know, it wasn't all bad.

As described in more detail below, Axelrod thought that the content of
Comey's statement was misleading, and that the way Comey executed the
press conference hurt the perception of the integrity of the
investigation in a significant way.

Axelrod said that he and Yates did not discuss ordering Comey not to
make the statement. Axelrod stated, "I don't recall that being
discussed. Because I don't think that would have been tenable, right.
The press was already coming. And.ordering the Director not to do
something can be very fraught. And so I don't recall that being a
discussion."

**2. Call to Lynch**

At 8:24 a.m., Lynch's Acting Chief of Staff, after being told by Newman
about the notice of the FBI press conference, sent an email to Axelrod,
asking, "Please call my cell when you are done with Rybicki." At
8:39 a.m., the Acting Chief of Staff sent the following email to Lynch:
"AG: You are about to receive a call from the director. Please give
me a call on my cell, and I can fill you in as to what it's about.
Alternatively I will be in the office in about 5 to 10 minutes and will
stop by."

Comey said that he called Lynch that morning and told her that he was
going to make a public press statement about the email investigation,
and that the FBI had completed the investigation and was sending it to
the Department with its recommendation. Comey stated that Lynch asked
him, "Can you tell me what your recommendation is going to be?" He said
that he replied, "I can't and I hope someday you'll understand why, but
I can't answer any of your questions---I can't answer any questions. I'm
not going to tell you what I'm going to say." Rybicki told us that Comey
called from his (Rybicki's) office because of the "snafus" with
connecting the calls and provided us with a similar account of what
Comey said.

Lynch told the OIG that she was in her office when Comey called her. She
said that he told her he was going to make a public statement "very
soon," and that it would be about the email investigation. She described
this call as follows:

And I said, when are you proposing to do this? And he said, very soon,
within a few moments. I don't recall if he said 10:00, but certainly it
was a short time period. And then he said, and I am not going to discuss
the contents with you because I think it's best if we say, if we, if we
are able to say that we did not coordinate the statement. Then I said
something, I had another question.. I don't recall whether I said,
what is it about? I just don't recall my other question. And he said,
it's about, it's going to be about the email investigation.

Lynch said that he gave her no further indication about the substance of
his statement. She said that Comey told her he was not going to go over
the statement with her so they both could say that it was not
coordinated. Asked whether this language raised a red flag indicating
that she should find out more or tell him to stop, Lynch said it did not
because it did not occur to her that Comey would talk about the end of
the investigation or the FBI's recommendation. She stated, "And
certainly I did not, at that time.on that day, even though I knew
that they had interviewed the Secretary, I don't think I had a view that
the investigation was done at that point."

Lynch told the OIG that, had she known what Comey was going to do, she
would have told him to stop. She said she also would have asked him,
"Why would you want to do this?" She stated, "Ultimately, announcing the
end of a matter, whether it's going to be.how will we resolve it,
would not be something that I would ever think that the, that the
investigative side would do, which is why that was not what I thought he
was going to do."

**3. Notifications to NSD**

At 8:28 a.m., McCabe and Strzok received notice that Axelrod and Yates
had been notified, which served as the "green light" for them to contact
Toscas and Laufman, respectively. At 8:33 a.m., McCabe sent an email to
Toscas, stating:

The Director just informed the DAG that at 1100 this morning he has
convened a press conference to announce the completion of our
investigation and the referral to DOJ. He will not tell her what he is
going to say. It is important that he not coordinate his statement in
any way. He will not take questions at the conference. His next call is
to the AG.

I wanted you to hear this from me. I understand that this will be
troubling to the team and I very much regret that. I want to talk to you
after the Principals Committee and am happy to bring my folks over
to DOJ this afternoon to discuss next steps.

McCabe said that he called Toscas, but Toscas was traveling, so he
instead sent Toscas an email. At 8:53 a.m., Toscas sent an email to
Carlin, Laufman, and Mary McCord, stating:

I'm on hold to talk to the DD now. I received a message from him a few
minutes ago saying that this morning the Director informed the DAG that
he will have a press conference at 11am today to announce the completion
of the FBI's investigation and the referral to DOJ. He will not take
questions at the conference, but he is not coordinating his statement
with us. I'll call when I get off the phone.

According to Laufman's notes, Toscas then held a conference call with
McCord, Laufman, and Prosecutors 1 and 2. According to these notes,
Toscas told the group that he had spoken with McCabe and learned that
Comey planned to hold a press conference at 11:00 a.m. to announce the
conclusion of the investigation and the FBI's recommendation to the
Department. The notes stated, "Director has told AG + DAG. McCabe
refused to convey substance. Director doesn't want statement to appear
coordinated with DOJ."

Laufman's notes also stated that, even though McCabe said that he would
not share the content of Comey's planned statement, McCabe told Toscas
that Comey planned to talk for 10 to 15 minutes and would say what the
FBI had done, what the FBI had found, and what the FBI's recommendation
to the Attorney General and the Department would be. Finally, the notes
indicate that Toscas spoke to Carlin, and Carlin "said not to discuss w/
OAG or ODAG in advance."

Other notes obtained by the OIG indicate that Laufman separately spoke
to Strzok at 8:35 a.m. that morning. According to these notes, Strzok
called Laufman and said that he was "told to call him and say" that
Comey would hold a press conference at 11:00 a.m. that morning. These
notes indicate that Laufman asked, "What exactly will he say," and that
Strzok replied, "Midyear." The notes also indicate that the "7th floor
has told AG/DAG."

**B. Reactions to the Statement**

Comey held his press conference at 11:00 a.m. on July 5, 2016. He
delivered the final version of his statement verbatim (provided as
Attachment D to this report) and did not take any questions. In this
section we describe reactions to his statement within the Department.

**1. Department and NSD Leadership**

Lynch told the OIG that she watched Comey's statement on the television
in her office. She described her thoughts as she watched Comey speak:

Discussing findings in something that was technically not closed
was,

I was a little stunned, actually.. I had no way to stop him at that

point, I mean, short of, you know, dashing across the street and
unplugging something..

But, so, as he went further into the analysis of not only what they
found but what they recommended, I just thought this was, this was done
to protect the image of the FBI because of the perception that somehow
the FBI was not going to be allowed to have their views known or their
views expressed or their views respected within the process. Because
that had, that in fact had been, for those of us who were inside the
Department at the time, and I don't know how the FBI was taking it at
the time, but certainly if you looked at criticism aimed at the
Department, people said, oh yeah, you know, the AG was appointed by Bill
Clinton to be U.S. Attorney.

But that was never the real, the real stated concern. It was that there
was going to be, you know, these strong investigators who wanted to
bring charges who would be somehow silenced or stepped on by the legal
side of the house, whether it was the political side or the career side,
they never really made much of a differentiation. Easy to attach it to
the political side if you're talking to the AG. But that was really
something that was, that was thrown around a lot in, in debate outside
of the Department.

So I viewed it as him trying to make his recommendation clear so that,
and from, and when he made the recommendation clear and said this is our
recommendation, I remember wondering does the, does the team know that
this is happening, you know, that the literal investigative team, both
sides of it? Did George Toscas know this was going to happen? Who
knew that this was going to occur? And why didn't we know in
advance?. Meaning the fifth floor, myself, the DAG. Why weren't we
informed in advance of this? So those are my thoughts during the,
during, watching of the, of that particular press conference.

Lynch said that she thought that the strongest public concern about the
Midyear investigation was not that she as the Attorney General was going
to "kill it," but that the investigative side would want to charge
somebody, and the legal side would say no for political reasons. She
said that she viewed Comey's public statement as "basically
saying.look.we're independent. We.aren't influenced by anybody.
And now.no one is also silencing us." Lynch stated that she did not
ascribe malicious intent to Comey, but that she thought that his
statement was a

"huge mistake."

Lynch told the OIG that she did not think that the FBI's recommendation
should have been made public "because we don't make those things public.
That's part of the discussion that we agents and prosecutors have.
That's part of, you know, we can talk about it. We can argue about it.
We can go back and forth about it."

Yates told the OIG that she had concerns about the substance of Comey's
statement as she watched the press conference. She stated:

And while I can't point to specific facts in Jim Comey's
description, you know, narrative description there that I would say were
inaccurate, I also remember at the time thinking the facts as those are
being laid out with much more censure than the facts as I understood
them to be and how I had been briefed on this matter. Sort of by way of
example, I don't recall Jim going through and explaining that there were
no classification markings on the vast, vast, vast majority. We got
three email chains with a, you know, the small C indicating that the
information was Confidential. Not the Top Secret or anything on there.
That it was all to people within the State Department..

That were really, to me gave the most accurate picture of what the facts
actually were there. And so I was stunned A, at the level of detail that
he went into. B, that he then made judgments and said things like
extremely careless and should have known that this material was. And
every, anyone should know you shouldn't have it on a private server.
That he gave the impression that, you know, the private server could
have been hacked. We don't really know for sure.. That, you know, I
thought wasn't really a balanced description of what the facts were
here.

And so, you know, there are a number of things that are concerning about
that. One, that he sort of put that slant on it, that it was done
without any consultation with folks at Main Justice. That it impugned
someone we weren't charging. We don't trash people we're not charging.
And we don't get to just make value or moral judgments about their
conduct. And there were things in there that I thought were unnecessary
from a factual, those, they were opinion as opposed to laying out, even
if he were going to do this, what was a fair, evenhanded recitation of
what the facts were. And I thought that was way out of order.

Asked what her reaction was when she looked back on the statement, Yates
said that she was "even more stunned." She stated:

At the time all of this is happening it's such a swirl. You know, the
tarmac happens and trying to figure out what to happen. I mean, all of
this is happening so quickly and in such a charged environment it's hard
to fully, for it all to fully sink in like it does when you look at it
then in the calm of day in, you know, in retrospect on that. And look,
it was a difficult situation with the tarmac. But that's not something I
think that was appropriate for the FBI Director to unilaterally then
decide how he was going to handle that. I think that was a factor that
we should consider in how we were going to publicly convey the results
of the investigation. And certainly if he had views about how that ought
to happen I think he should speak up and should convey those views. But
to make the unilateral decision to do it is one thing.

And then to put out that level of detail without coordinating that with
DOJ or, you know, DOJ agreeing with that, and then for it to be with a
slant that I didn't think was accurate---and I'm not saying he did that
intentionally. I don't know. I certainly wouldn't accuse anybody of
that. But the way it was conveyed I didn't think gave the most accurate
description. And then, as I said, impugning someone that we weren't
charging with sort of personal judgments..

Yates said that she did agree with Comey's statement that no reasonable
prosecutor would bring a case based on the facts developed in the
investigation, but that she did not think that it was "the place of the
FBI Director to be out telling the public what a prosecutor would do
there."

Axelrod stated that he and Yates watched the press conference in her
office. He said that he was "pretty confident" in what Comey was going
to conclude based on what they had been led to believe about the
investigation and did not fully process the content of the statement
while Comey was delivering it. He said that he reacted more negatively
to the statement after attending the briefing by prosecutors the next
day:

I didn't know all the facts because we were giving George Toscas the
space to tell us what we thought we needed to know. We were not in the
weeds. And the next day when we got the briefing on some of the
stuff in the weeds there were important facts that the NSD guys briefed
the AG on that were absent from Comey's statement. And so that was when
I started to have a much more strongly negative reaction to what Comey
had said.

Asked what facts were missing that he thought were important, Axelrod
identified the following:

A couple. One, that according to the NSD guys and what I recall from
their briefing is that if you look at the spectrum of cases that the

Department has brought in the past historically in this area the
Department has never brought a case where the classified information was
shared between people who work for the Government. It was always someone
sharing classified information with someone outside of the Government.
That's a pretty important fact. That if you are laying out your reasons
or reasons for recommending declining prosecution that's a, you know, to
me a pretty important one. The other one I recall was that the NSD guys
said that most of the emails were, I think whether it was all or most,
the majority of the emails that turned out to be classified had been
sent late at night or on the weekends. Which, you know, to me means it's
people sort of trying to, you know, were not at their desks, right,
where they have access to classified systems trying to talk about, you
know, talk around or talk about issues. So I thought that was a really
important fact. And again, just when you're talking about intent, right,
that's an important thing that bears on intent.

Axelrod contrasted Comey's statement with the briefing by the
prosecutors the following day, which he characterized as a "much more
complete picture." He stated, "When the prosecutors were done
talking the reaction was like oh, this is clearly a declination. When
Comey was done talking, as I think you saw from the public
reaction,.it was much more of a mixed bag."

Axelrod told the OIG that the way the press conference was executed hurt
the perception of the integrity of the investigation in a significant
way. He stated:

Because if the goal, to do what he did the goal would need to be, and I
would imagine his goal was that by the time he's done talking that even
if people don't agree with the outcome they can see why, you know,
understand his thinking and see like why he got to the place he got. And
that it would sort of be like a closing argument or something, right. It
would be, right, here's the rationale and I've seen the facts and
here's why I'm coming out the way I'm coming out. And people again, on
the, and for the partisans and people with political agendas, they're
not going to be convinced. But that reasonable center would say like
okay, yeah, we get it.

That was not the reaction to the statement. Which I think just by its
own terms means the execution failed. Because it raised a lot of
questions. It, just it wasn't, it was much more of a, like I said, the
difference in tone and emphasis between what he said and then what we
heard in the AG's office the next morning was striking---to me. And I
think if he had, you know, if the folks who gave the briefing the next
day were the ones who, I mean, obviously not but that those words
had been said at the press conference I think it would have been
received quite differently.

Toscas told the OIG that his initial reaction to Comey's statement was,
"Holy cow, like they Axelrod and the FBI were talking about
doing a joint appearance or statement of some sort and he's just doing
it all on his own." Toscas said that he had concerns about Comey's
statement, both the substance of it and the fact that it deviated from
Department practice. He stated:

We don't say we're closing something, but let me tell you some bad stuff
that we saw along the way, but it doesn't rise to the level of bringing
a case. We just don't do it.. I don't know whether you can point back
to a document some place, but after doing this for almost 24 years,
somehow it's ingrained in me and it appears to be ingrained in everyone
around me and everyone who does this whether they're new or veterans,
it's just something you don't do, you do not.

It's the same reason why, if you, for example, and we have these
discussions in some cases, if you go get a search warrant and it's under
seal and in the search warrant you're seeing Tom---there's probable
cause that Tom committed, fill in the blank, whatever horrible crime you
want or a lesser crime. You go do your search. There's no case. There's
no prosecution. It never comes. You know it never leads to a
prosecutable case. You don't unseal that warrant and tell the public,
hey, there's probable cause that Tom is, you know engages in child
pornography or we suspect him of a bank robbery, you just don't do it.

And so it's the same type of principle. When you decide you're not
proceeding, you say nothing more. I get that in some instances there's
going to be a lot of public knowledge of the facts. A shooting, for
example, where the public has seen what happened, so they already know
of actual conduct whether it's criminal or not is different, so you
could say, we're not bringing a charge, but still comment on what
everyone has seen.

But that's not what this was and people could have tried to guess or you
know surmise what the actual exchanges were in some instances or what
the particular parts of the classified information were, but I just
didn't see it as something that---it did not square with the way we
would ordinarily operate.

Toscas said that Comey's decision to do the statement seemed "beyond
strange" and "incredibly dangerous" considering the ongoing campaign and
the proximity to the election.

Asked whether "extremely careless" was too similar to "gross
negligence," Toscas said that it was. Toscas said that once Comey was
getting "grilled about.gross negligence," it must have become obvious
that they chose words that were so similar to the statutory language
that they "created friction in being able to explain his ultimate
decision." He told the OIG that he did not know how Comey's lawyers
missed this issue, and that the statement would have benefitted from
legal review by the prosecutors.

Toscas did not have a problem with Comey's statement that no "reasonable
prosecutor" would bring a case. He stated:

That didn't bother me at all. This is a man who was the Deputy
Attorney General of our country. He ran this Department. He was a
lifelong prosecutor. I had no problem with that. I know other people do
because they say, oh he's usurping authority and things like that, but I
think he is a---he is perfectly qualified, and regardless of his
position, even in private practice or as a citizen, a private citizen,
he could say that and I think it has credibility.

However, Toscas expressed concerns about the downstream effects of
Comey's deviation from Department practice in making a public statement
in July, which he said then impacted Comey's decisions in October. We
discuss those concerns in Chapter Ten.

**2. Prosecutors**

As described above, Prosecutors 1 and 2 learned about Comey's plan to
hold a press conference as the result of McCabe's call to Toscas and
Strzok's call to Laufman. Strzok also spoke directly to Prosecutor 1
that morning. Prosecutor 1 said that he was "extremely angry" on the
phone and pressed Strzok to tell him what Comey planned to say, but that
Strzok flatly refused and said that he was not allowed to tell him.
Following this call, Prosecutor 1 contacted Prosecutors 3 and 4 and
informed them that Comey planned to hold a press conference that
morning.

The prosecutors had varying reactions to the substance of Comey's
statement. Prosecutor 4 told the OIG that he was surprised at how strong
Comey's "no reasonable prosecutor" language was and by the inclusion of
negative commentary about former Secretary Clinton's conduct, but that
he did not recall hearing anything factually inaccurate in the
statement.

Prosecutors 1, 2, and 3 identified substantive concerns with Comey's
statement. Prosecutor 1 highlighted Comey's negative comments about
former Secretary Clinton, characterizing them as "declining to prosecute
someone and then sort of dirtying them up with facts that you develop
along the way." Prosecutor 1 also said that the use of "extremely
careless" to describe her conduct "begs questions about gross
negligence" that could have been avoided if the statement were more
carefully crafted. Prosecutor 2 thought that the statement was "totally
unfair on many levels," particularly the discussion of uncharged
conduct, and that the characterization of the evidence in the statement
was "very skewed."

Prosecutors 3 and 4 said they had concerns about Comey's use of
"extremely careless" to describe former Secretary Clinton's conduct in
the statement. On July 6, 2016, Prosecutor 3 sent the following email to
Prosecutors 1, 2, and 4:

It's unfortunate that Comey didn't differentiate the standard of proof
between 793(f) and the other statutes. He glossed over all with mention
of the absence of intent and made no mention of the necessity of proving
knowledge of classified information with regard to 793(f) and why
that proof was deficient. By using the phrase "extremely careless" he
lit up the talking heads last night, many of whom opined that such
verbiage warranted a gross negligence charge and that Comey was giving
Clinton an unwarranted pass. Even the socalled legal experts didn't seem
to understand the elements of that statute and why it did not apply to
the facts.

In his OIG interview, Prosecutor 3 said that he thought that Comey's
remarks had a good assessment of the investigation, but that he should
have better articulated the gross negligence provision "because that
seemed to draw a lot of fire from the public." Prosecutor 3 said that
Comey's statement did not explain well enough that under the gross
negligence provision "you have to know.you're being careless with
what is in fact classified information."

On August 2, 2016, Laufman sent an email to FBI Attorney 1 in connection
with draft FBI responses to Congressional inquiries that had been made
to Comey, and copied Toscas and the NSD prosecutors and supervisors on
the email. Laufman stated the following about Comey's July 5 statement:

We appreciate the Bureau sending us its draft response to the inquiries
Director Comey received from Congress. We assume you have already
considered and rejected simply responding to the letters (which were
sent before the Director's congressional testimony) by referring the
Committees to the Director's lengthy congressional testimony. As the
Director has publicly stated, the Bureau did not coordinate the
Director's public statements about this case (many of which are repeated
in the Bureau's draft response) with the Justice Department, and we
therefore did not have an opportunity to express our views about those
statements in advance. As I'm sure you understand, some of the
Director's statements went beyond the types of statements that we, as
prosecutors, would typically make in a case where no charges were
brought (e.g., characterizing uncharged conduct of individuals within
the scope of the investigation). While we understand and respect the
Director's reasons for departing from normal practice in this one
instance, we, of course, have not departed from our practice of
refraining from making such statements---and we do not want to be
perceived as concurring in or adopting such statements.

**VI. Congressional Testimony Explaining the July 5 Statement**

**A. July 7, 2016**

Two days after his statement, on July 7, 2016, Comey testified for
several hours before the House Committee on Oversight and Government
Reform (HOGR).^[^139^](#fn139){#fnref139 .footnote-ref}^ During this
hearing, Comey was asked numerous questions about the basis for the
decision to recommend declining prosecution of former Secretary Clinton
and whether there was evidence that former Secretary Clinton violated
any criminal statutes, including the gross negligence provision in 18
U.S.C. § 793(f). He also was asked about the specific language used in
his statement. In response to a question about the meaning of "extremely
careless," Comey stated, "I intended it as a common sense term..
Somebody who is---should know better, someone who is demonstrating a
lack of care that strikes me as---there's ordinary accidents, and then
there's just real sloppiness. So I kind of think of that as real
sloppiness."

Representative John Mica noted the proximity of the tarmac incident on
June

27, Lynch's announcement that she would "defer to the FBI" on July 1,
Comey's statement on the morning of July 5, and former Secretary
Clinton's campaign appearance with then President Obama on the afternoon
of July 5. In response to a series of questions about the circumstances
of his statement, Comey responded, "Look me in the eye and listen to
what I'm about to say. I did not coordinate my statement with
anyone. The White House, the Department of Justice, nobody outside the
FBI family had any idea what I was about to say. I say that under oath.
I stand by that. There was no coordination." Comey also testified that
there was no interference in or attempt to influence the investigation
by then President Obama, the Clinton campaign, or former Secretary
Clinton herself.

Comey also was asked questions about his reasons for doing an
independent press conference. In response to a question about whether
the system was "rigged," Comey stated:

I get a 10-year term to ensure that I stay outside of politics, but in a
way that it's easy. I lead an organization that is resolutely
apolitical. We are tough aggressive people. If we can make a case, we'll
make a case. We do not care what the person's stripes are or what their
bank account looks like.

And I worry very much when people doubt that. It's the reason I did the
press conference 2 days ago. I care about the FBI's reputation, I care
about the Justice Department. I care about the whole system deeply. And
so I decided I'm going to do something no Director's ever done before.
I'm not going to tell the Attorney General or anybody else what I'm
going to say, or even that I'm going to say it. They did not know, nor
did the media know, until I walked out what I was going to talk about.

And then I offered extraordinary transparency, which I'm sure confused
and bugged a lot of people.

Responding to another question about his statement, Comey stated:

Everything I did would have been done privately in the normal
course. We have great conversations between the FBI and prosecutors. We
make recommendations. We argue back and forth. What I decided to do was
offer transparency to the American people about the "whys" of that, what
I was going to do because I thought it was very, very important for
their confidence in the system of justice. And within that their
confidence in the FBI.

And I was very concerned that if I didn't show that transparency, that
in that lack of transparency people would say, "Gee. What is going on
here? Something---you know, something seems squirrely here?" So I said I
would do something unprecedented because I think it is unprecedented
situation.

Now, the next Director who is criminally investigating one of the two
candidates for President may find him or herself bound by my precedent.
Okay. So if that happens in the next 100 years they'll have to deal with
what I did. So I decided it was worth doing.

B.  **September 28, 2016**

Comey also testified in an oversight hearing before the House Judiciary
Committee on September 28, 2016, several weeks after the FBI released
various materials from the Midyear investigation to Congress and in
response to Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
requests.^[^140^](#fn140){#fnref140 .footnote-ref}^ During this hearing,
Comey answered questions about the conduct of the Midyear investigation,
including questions about the reliance on voluntary production of
information, the destruction of devices used by former Secretary
Clinton, decisions to grant immunity to witnesses, and the
interpretation of the gross negligence provision.

Comey was asked again about the independence of the investigation.
Representative Steve King asked about the interview of former Secretary
Clinton and whether "Loretta Lynch had her people in there?" Comey
responded, "There was no advice to me from the Attorney General or any
of the lawyers working for her. My team formulated a recommendation that
was communicated to me. And the FBI reached its conclusion as to what to
do uncoordinated from the Department of Justice." Asked whether he was
responsible for the decision to decline prosecution, Comey said that the
decision to decline was made in the Department, but acknowledged that
there was "virtually zero chance" that the Department would make a
different decision once Comey had made his recommendation public. He
stated, "But part of my decision was based on my prediction that there
was no way the Department of Justice would prosecute on these facts in
any event."

Importantly, at the September 28 hearing, Comey was asked, "Would you
reopen the Clinton investigation if you discovered new information that
was both relevant and substantial?" Comey answered, "It is hard for me
to answer in the abstract. We would certainly look at any new and
substantial information.. What we can say is.if people have new
and substantial information, we would like to see it so we can make an
evaluation."

B.  **June 8, 2017**

On June 8, 2017, following his firing as FBI Director, Comey testified
about Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election before the
Senate Select

Committee on Intelligence (SSCI).^[^141^](#fn141){#fnref141
.footnote-ref}^ In an exchange with Committee Chairman Senator Richard
Burr, Comey was asked about the Midyear investigation, including whether
his decision to publicly report the results of the investigation was
influenced by the tarmac meeting between former Attorney General Lynch
and former President Clinton. Comey replied, "Yes. In---in an ultimately
conclusive way. That was the thing that capped it for me that I had to
do something separately to protect the credibility of the investigation,
which meant both the FBI and the Justice

Department."

Senator Burr then asked whether there were other things that contributed
to Comey's decision that he could describe in an open session. Comey
stated:

There were other things that contributed to that. One significant item I
can't, I know the committee's been briefed on. There's been some public
accounts of it, which are nonsense, but I understand the committee's
been briefed on the classified facts.

Probably the only other consideration that I guess I can talk about in
an open setting is at one point the Attorney General had directed me not
to call it an "investigation," but instead to call it a "matter," which
confused me and concerned me. But that was one of the bricks in the load
that led me to conclude I have to step away from the Department if we're
to close this case credibly.

The classified facts indicating potential bias by the former Attorney
General referenced in Comey's testimony are discussed in the classified
appendix to this report. As described in more detail in that appendix,
Comey had concerns about Lynch's ability to credibly announce the
closure of the investigation, in part because of classified information
learned by the FBI in March 2016 regarding alleged attempts to influence
the Midyear investigation by Lynch, as well efforts by Comey to extend
the investigation to impact the election. Although the FBI did not find
these allegations credible, did not investigate the allegations, and did
not inform Lynch about the information until August 2016, Comey was
concerned that, if the allegations became known, it could affect the
public's perception of Lynch's involvement in the investigation.

Comey was asked to provide additional details about Lynch's instruction
to call the Midyear investigation a "matter" by Senator James Lankford.
Comey stated:

Well, it concerned me because we were at the point where we had refused
to confirm the existence, as we typically do, of an investigation for
months, and it was getting to a place where that looked silly, because
the campaigns were talking about interacting with the FBI in the course
of our work.

The Clinton campaign at the time was using all kind of euphemisms---
security review, matters, things like that---for what was going on. We
were getting to a place where the Attorney General and I were both going
to have to testify and talk publicly about it. And I wanted to know,
was she going to authorize us to confirm we had an investigation?

And she said, "Yes," but don't call it that, call it a "matter." And I
said, why would I do that? And she said, just call it a "matter."

And, again, you look back in hindsight, you think should I have resisted
harder? I just said, all right, it isn't worth---this isn't a hill worth
dying on and so I just said, okay, the press is going to completely
ignore it. And that's what happened. When I said, we have opened a
matter, they all reported the FBI has an investigation open.

And so that concerned me because that language tracked the way the
campaign was talking about FBI's work and that's
concerning.^[^142^](#fn142){#fnref142 .footnote-ref}^

In response to a follow up question about this testimony, Comey stated:

And again, I don't know whether it was intentional or not, but it gave
the impression that the Attorney General was looking to align the way we
talked about our work with the way a political campaign was describing
the same activity, which was inaccurate. We had a criminal investigation
open with, as I said before, the Federal Bureau of Investigation. We had
an investigation open at the time, and so that gave me a queasy feeling.

Comey also had an extended exchange with Senator John Cornyn about
whether Lynch had an appearance of a conflict of interest requiring
appointment of a special counsel.

SENATOR CORNYN: But it seems to me that you clearly believe that Loretta
Lynch, the Attorney General, had an appearance of a conflict of interest
on the Clinton email investigation. Is that correct?

COMEY: I think that's fair. I didn't believe she could credibly decline
that investigation, at least not without grievous damage to the
Department of Justice and to the FBI.

SENATOR CORNYN: And, under Department of Justice and FBI norms, wouldn't
it have been appropriate for the Attorney General, or, if she had
recused herself---which she did not do---for the Deputy Attorney General
to appoint a special counsel? That's essentially what's happened now
with Director Mueller. Would that have been an appropriate step in the
Clinton email investigation in your opinion?

COMEY: Certainly a possible step, yes, sir.

SENATOR CORNYN: And were you aware that Ms. Lynch had been requested
numerous times to appoint a special counsel and had refused?

COMEY: Yes, from---I think Congress had, members of Congress had
repeatedly asked. Yes, sir.

SENATOR CORNYN: Yours truly did on multiple occasions. And that
heightened your concerns about the appearance of a conflict of interest
with the Department of Justice, which caused you to make what you have
described as an incredibly painful decision to basically take the matter
up yourself and led to that July press conference.

COMEY: Yes, sir. After President Clinton, former President Clinton, met
on the plane with the Attorney General, I considered whether I should
call for the appointment of a special counsel and had decided that that
would be an unfair thing to do, because I knew there was no case there.
We had investigated it very, very thoroughly.

I know this is a subject of passionate disagreement, but I knew there
was no case there. And calling for the appointment of a special counsel
would be brutally unfair because it would send the message, aha, there's
something here. That was my judgment. Again, lots of people have
different views of it. But that's how I thought about it.

SENATOR CORNYN: Well, if the special counsel had been appointed, they
could've made that determination that there was nothing there and
declined to pursue it, right?

COMEY: Sure, but it would've been many months later or a year later.

**VII. Analysis**

We found no evidence that Comey's public statement announcing the FBI's
decision to close the investigation was the result of bias or an effort
to influence the election. Instead, the documentary and testimonial
evidence reviewed by the OIG reflected that Comey's decision was the
result of his consideration of the evidence that the FBI had collected
during the course of the investigation and his understanding of the
proof required to pursue a prosecution under the relevant statutes.
Nevertheless, we concluded that Comey's unilateral announcement was
inconsistent with Department policy, usurped the authority of Attorney
General, and did not accurately describe the legal position of the
Department prosecutors.

Although we found no evidence that Lynch and former President Clinton
discussed the Midyear investigation or engaged in other inappropriate
discussion during their tarmac meeting on June 27, 2016, we also found
that Lynch's failure to recognize the appearance problem created by
former President Clinton's visit and to take action to cut the visit
short was an error in judgment. We further concluded that her efforts to
respond to the meeting by explaining what her role would be in the
investigation going forward created public confusion and did not
adequately address the situation. Finally, we found that Lynch, having
decided not to recuse herself, retained authority over both the final
prosecution decision and the Department's management of the Midyear
investigation, including whether to respond to Comey's call to her on
the morning of July 5 by instructing him to share his statement with
her.

**A. Comey's Decision to Make a Unilateral Announcement**

Beginning in early 2016, and certainly by late April 2016, the Midyear
team reached a general consensus that the evidence would not support a
prosecution, absent major unexpected developments in the form of newly
discovered emails or testimony. This assessment was based on a lack of
evidence showing that former Secretary Clinton, her senior aides, or
other State Department officials knew that they were emailing unmarked
classified information or intended to introduce classified information
onto an unclassified system. Witnesses told us that, at the time, they
understood the emails in question were sent by State Department
employees to other State Department employees in the course of doing
their jobs, and that both the senders and recipients had the appropriate
clearances and the need to know the information. As described in Chapter
Two, the prosecutors determined based on their legal research and review
of past Department practice that evidence of knowledge or intent was
necessary to charge any individual with violations of 18 U.S.C. §§
793(d), 793(e), or 793(f)(1).

Comey understood and agreed with this assessment. He told us that, as he
realized that the case likely would not result in charges, he became
concerned that senior Department officials were unable to announce a
declination in a way that the public would find credible and objective.
Comey said that these concerns were based on the public perception
created by an Attorney General appointed by a Democratic President
announcing that the Democratic Presidential candidate would not be
prosecuted, not on any actions by or concerns specific to Lynch or
Yates; however, as discussed below, Comey also pointed to public
comments made by then President Obama and his White House Press
Secretary about the Midyear investigation, concerns that classified
information referencing Lynch would be publicly released and would
impact her credibility, Lynch's alleged admonition to him early on to
refer to the FBI's investigation as a "matter," and Lynch's meeting with
former President Clinton as contributing to his concerns about her.

In April 2016, Comey initiated discussions with Yates and Axelrod about
how to credibly announce the conclusion of the investigation based on
the likelihood that the case would result in a declination. During this
discussion, Comey stated that he was likely to request the appointment
of a special counsel "the deeper we get into summer" without concluding
the investigation. Comey told the OIG that his reference to a special
counsel was intended to induce the Department to move more quickly to
obtain the Mills and Samuelson laptops. We did not find evidence that
Comey at any time seriously considered requesting a special counsel.

Lynch told us that she was aware that Yates met with Comey, and that
Comey indicated that he was not sure there was a "there there"---*i.e.*,
it was not a prosecutable case. Lynch also was receiving periodic
briefings about the Midyear investigation, and said that she thought
that any discussions about announcing a declination were "very
premature" at that time because there were remaining investigative steps
to be taken. Lynch told us that she did not know that Comey mentioned
requesting a special counsel during his discussion with Yates, and that
no one in the Department or the FBI ever suggested to her that a special
counsel was needed.

Discussions about a strategy for announcing a declination also took
place within the FBI. Comey told the OIG that he considered every option
for announcing a declination, from a one-line press release issued by
the Department to an FBIonly press conference providing a detailed
statement about the investigation. Comey said that foremost in his mind
was the need to minimize the "reputational damage" to the Department and
the FBI that would result from a declination, and to preserve the
credibility and integrity of the institution.

In late April 2016, Comey raised the possibility of "doing something
solo" in a meeting with Baker, McCabe, and Rybicki. He also began
drafting a public statement that contemplated that he would act alone in
announcing the declination, sending a first draft of this statement to
Baker, McCabe, and Rybicki on May 2, 2016. Witnesses told us that Comey
had not yet made a firm decision to deliver a public statement when he
sent this draft, but that he wanted to discuss it as one possible option
for announcing a declination.

According to various witnesses we interviewed, Comey and other senior
FBI officials knew that delivering a separate public statement held
substantial risk.

McCabe said that he expressed concerns that such a statement would
represent a "complete departure" from Department protocol and could set
a "potentially dangerous precedent" for the FBI. Rosenberg said that in
discussions with Comey, he raised the possibility that doing a separate
statement would create an irreparable breach with the Department. Comey
said that he knew it was a "crazy idea, but we were in a 500-year
flood."

Comey discussed the draft public statement in meetings with members of
the Midyear team and with senior FBI officials at various times in May
and June 2016. These discussions included whether to do a separate
statement at all, in addition to the specific language revisions
discussed in Section III.B and C above. Comey said that by June 27,
2016, the date of Lynch's tarmac meeting with former President Clinton,
he was "90 percent there, like highly likely" in terms of deciding to
deliver the statement.

Despite this, Comey and other senior FBI officials continued to engage
their Department counterparts in discussions about how to credibly
announce a declination. These discussions occurred at various levels:
between Comey and Yates; between McCabe and Carlin; and between Strzok
and Laufman. At no time did anyone from the FBI inform anyone from the
Department that Comey was even considering making a statement on his
own, let alone that he had already drafted such a statement. Department
witnesses at all levels told us that they believed that shortly after
the interview of former Secretary Clinton was completed, the Department
and the FBI would work together to deliver some sort of coordinated
statement, and that Comey would be involved. Yates told the OIG that her
understanding was that they would be "all holding hands and jumping off
the bridge together."

Comey said that from the time he first conceived of making a separate
statement, he intended to deliver it without coordinating with the
Department. He told the OIG that he made a conscious decision not to
tell Department leadership about his plans to "go it alone" because he
was concerned that they would instruct him not to do it. Comey admitted
that he concealed his intentions from the Department until the morning
of his press conference, and instructed his staff to do the same, to
make it impracticable for Department leadership to prevent him from
delivering his statement.

We found that it was extraordinary and insubordinate for Comey to
conceal his intentions from his superiors, the Attorney General and
Deputy Attorney General, for the admitted purpose of preventing them
from telling him not to make the statement, and to instruct his
subordinates in the FBI to do the same. Comey waited until the morning
of his press conference to inform Lynch and Yates of his plans to hold
one without them, and did so only after first notifying the press. As a
result, Lynch's office learned about Comey's plans via press inquiries
rather than from Comey. Moreover, when Comey spoke with Lynch he did not
tell her what he intended to say in his statement.

*Factors Cited by Comey as Influencing His Decision*

Comey cited several factors that he said influenced his decision to make
a statement on his own and without coordinating with the Department. In
addition to public comments made by former President Obama and his White
House Press Secretary about the Midyear investigation, Comey cited four
things that he said caused him to be concerned that Lynch could not
credibly participate in announcing a declination: her alleged
instruction to call the Midyear investigation a "matter" in a meeting
held on September 28, 2015, which Comey said "made his spider sense
tingle" and caused him to "worry.that she's carrying water for the
Clinton campaign"; concerns that highly classified information
referencing Lynch would be publicly released and would impact her
credibility; the tarmac meeting between Lynch and former President Bill
Clinton; and the fact that Lynch was appointed by a President that was
the same political party as former Secretary Clinton.

We found none of these reasons persuasive, either standing alone or
considered together, as a basis for deviating from well-established
Department policies and acting unilaterally in a way intentionally
designed to avoid supervision by Department leadership over his actions.

**Lynch's Reference to the Investigation as a "Matter."** We found that
the discussion between Lynch and Comey on September 28, 2015, was not
generally viewed as a particularly significant event, other than by
Comey. As described in Chapter Four, Department and FBI officials
present at this meeting did not interpret Lynch's reference in the way
Comey did, and contemporaneous notes indicate that the discussion at the
meeting was focused on the need to track language in recent letters to
Congress and the State Department. Lynch told us that her intent in
suggesting that Comey refer to Midyear as a "matter" was to allow them
to answer questions about staffing and resources while also complying
with longstanding Department policy to refrain from confirming ongoing
criminal investigations, not to downplay the significance of the
investigation. Other Department witnesses present at this meeting
interpreted Lynch's comment as a suggestion, not an instruction from
Lynch. We found no evidence that this phrasing was intended to "track"
the language used by the Clinton campaign or was an attempt to influence
the investigation. Remarkably, Comey never told Lynch or Yates that this
(or any other) incident raised questions about Lynch's impartiality in
his mind, or that such concerns might influence his actions in handling
the case.

**Concerns about Future Leaks of Classified Information.** As described
in the classified appendix to this report, Comey told the OIG that he
became concerned in mid-June 2016 that classified information suggesting
that Lynch was exerting influence on the Midyear investigation would be
publicly released, and that this would impact her ability to credibly
announce a declination. However, by midJune Comey was already very far
along in his plans to make a unilateral statement. Moreover, witnesses
told us that the FBI determined based on various factors that the
allegations that Lynch had interfered with the investigation were not
credible, describing the information as "objectively false."

Comey told the OIG that he never saw any actions by Lynch to interfere
with the investigation, stating, "I'll say this again, I saw no reality
of Loretta Lynch interfering in this investigation." Rather, Comey said
he was concerned that leaks of this non-credible information about Lynch
would undermine her credibility. The FBI did not inform Lynch about the
allegation in the highly classified information until August 2016, more
than a month after Comey's announcement, and then (according to Lynch)
did so in a way that highlighted the FBI's assessment that the
information lacked credibility.^[^143^](#fn143){#fnref143
.footnote-ref}^ At no time did Comey alert Lynch or Yates that the
information raised concerns about Lynch's ability to participate
credibly in the Midyear investigation or in any declination
announcement. At no time did Comey consult with Lynch or Yates about how
to deal with this false information to protect the credibility of the
declination decision.

Finally, the OIG found that the same classified information also
included an allegation, equally lacking in credibility, that Comey
planned to delay the Midyear investigation to aid Republicans. Comey did
not inform Lynch or Yates of this fact, let alone discuss with them
whether this information might be leaked or whether, if it was, it might
undermine his credibility as a spokesman.

**Lynch's Tarmac Meeting with Former President Clinton.** Comey told us
that by the time the tarmac incident occurred on June 27, 2016, he was
already "90 percent there" in terms of the decision to make a public
statement, but that the tarmac meeting "tipped the scales" towards
making his mind up to go forward with an independent announcement on the
Midyear investigation. While Comey's concerns about the impact of the
meeting were legitimate, and warranted his informing Lynch of his
concerns and providing her with any views he had on how it should be
addressed, ultimately the decision whether Lynch should voluntarily
recuse herself was Lynch's to make, not Comey's.

In his October 2016 SAC Conference speech, Comey emphasized the damage
to the FBI that would result if he "did the normal thing" in the wake of
the tarmac meeting. He stated that he was concerned that if the FBI made
a private recommendation to Lynch, "the Department of Justice will screw
around it for Lord knows how long, issue probably a one sentence
declination, and then the world will catch on fire." However, the
stated concerns are inconsistent with what Comey had already discussed
with the Department about the "endgame" of the investigation. Comey knew
that the Department was well aware of his view that the Midyear
investigation needed to be completed promptly. Comey had previously
discussed with Yates the prospect of requesting a special counsel if the
investigation continued past the nominating conventions, and Yates told
us that she and Comey had made plans to "hold hands and jump off the
bridge together" in announcing a declination. Moreover, notes from
discussions of the Midyear team that occurred shortly before the Clinton
interview on July 2 reflected that the prosecutors understood that Comey
wanted to make the announcement by July 8 and therefore there would be
"withering pressure" to complete the LHM and memorialize the Midyear
prosecutors' conclusions immediately after the Clinton interview. There
simply was no basis for Comey to believe that the Department would take
weeks to act on the FBI's recommendation on such a consequential matter.

Moreover, Comey never raised his concerns about the tarmac meeting with
Yates or requested that Lynch recuse herself. Instead, Comey viewed the
tarmac meeting as a justification for proceeding with his existing plan
to act alone. Comey admitted that had Lynch recused herself he might
have reconsidered his decision to make a separate announcement, stating,
"Had Loretta said, I'm stepping out of this. I'm making Sally Yates the
Acting Attorney General and had I gone and sat down with Sally and heard
her vision for it, maybe we would have ended up in a different place."
While Comey indicated that he did not speak with Yates because Lynch had
already made her announcement on July 1, we found that he still could
and should have done so.

**Lynch was Appointed by a Democratic President.** Comey cited a general
concern that Lynch was appointed by a President who was from the same
political party as former Secretary Clinton. Yet that fact existed at
the beginning of the Midyear investigation. At no time did Comey inform
either Lynch or Yates that he viewed Lynch as having a "conflict of
interest," or that he thought she should be recused from the
investigation on the basis of party affiliation, or for any other
reason. While Comey did mention the prospect of a special counsel in his
April 2016 meeting with Yates, he did so seemingly as a bargaining chip
to get the Department to move more quickly on the Mills and Samuelson
laptops, and we found no evidence that he seriously pursued this option.

We found it troubling that Comey would have formed views about Lynch's
inability to participate in or credibly decline prosecution of the
Midyear investigation, yet never once raised them with Lynch or Yates.
If Comey genuinely believed that Lynch could not credibly participate in
the Midyear investigation or announce a declination, he should have
raised these concerns with Yates or Lynch and requested that Lynch
recuse herself. If he believed that neither Lynch nor Yates could
credibly make a prosecutive decision, he should have discussed this with
them at the beginning of the investigation and requested appointment of
a special counsel. He did not.

*Impact of Comey's Decision to Make a Unilateral Statement*

Comey's decision to depart from longstanding Department practice and
publicly announce the FBI's declination recommendation without
coordinating with the Department was an unjustified usurpation of
authority.^[^144^](#fn144){#fnref144 .footnote-ref}^ Although Comey was
aware that the Midyear prosecutors and Department leadership viewed the
case as a likely declination, Comey made the decision to announce the
conclusion of the investigation before prosecutors had a chance to
render their own formal prosecutorial decision. Comey's views on what a
"reasonable prosecutor" would do---while informed by the prosecutors'
views on the likely outcome of the case and the Department's research on
past mishandling cases---were nonetheless made without consulting the
Department in advance. Although Comey stated in his press conference
that "the prosecutors make the decisions about whether charges are
appropriate based on evidence the FBI has helped collect," by making
this public announcement about the FBI's charging recommendation, and by
stating his view that "no reasonable prosecutor" would bring charges, he
effectively made the decision for the prosecutors because it would
thereafter have been virtually impossible for them to make any other
decision.

Even if Comey had every reason to believe that Lynch and Yates agreed
with him, speaking unilaterally and publicly for the Department about a
decision to decline prosecution is not a function granted to the
Director. The authority to make such a statement had not been delegated
to him by his superiors, the Attorney General and the Deputy Attorney
General. Comey acknowledged this, but argued that "the potential for
damage to the institution" outweighed the need to follow Department
practice, stating, "In a normal circumstance it's the right of the
Attorney General and Deputy Attorney General to make those decisions and
the FBI

Director should tell them, but this was not the normal circumstance."

In our criminal justice system, the investigative and prosecutive
functions are intentionally kept separate as a check on the government's
power to bring criminal charges. While Comey's statement acknowledged
those differing roles and responsibilities, his actions violated those
separate authorities by arrogating to himself and the FBI the ability to
make judgments about whether a case of the highest political consequence
should be charged, and he did so by intentionally seeking to prevent
Department leadership from being able to stop him based on concerns that
he never even gave them an opportunity to consider. In making a
statement announcing the conclusion of the Midyear investigation and
opining on what the only possible prosecutorial decision could be, Comey
made it virtually impossible for any prosecutor to make any other
recommendation. He thereby effectively operated as not only the FBI
Director, but also as the Attorney General. It is the Attorney General
who is accountable to the public and to Congress for prosecutorial
decisions made by the Department, not the head of the investigating law
enforcement agency. Comey took that accountability away from Lynch and
placed it on himself when he decided to deliver a unilateral statement.

Additionally, Comey's decision to make an announcement without
consulting or obtaining approval from Department leadership violated the
Department's media policy and also may have violated regulations
regarding the public release of information. *See* 28 C.F.R. §
50.2(b)(9). Although Baker told the OIG that Comey's call to Lynch and
Yates on the morning of his press conference constituted approval for
purposes of this regulation, Comey's testimony that he concealed his
plans from Lynch until the morning of July 5, only contacted her after
the FBI had notified the press in order to make it impossible for her to
stop him, and told Lynch when they did speak that he was not going to
tell her what he intended to say in his statement, does not constitute
consulting with or obtaining approval from

Department leadership. In light of these events, we recommend that the
Department consider making explicit in the USAM what we thought was
obvious in light of Department policy and protocol---that an
investigating agency cannot publicly announce its recommended charging
decision in a criminal investigation prior to consulting with the
Attorney General, Deputy Attorney General, U.S. Attorney, or his or her
designee, and cannot proceed to publicly announce that decision prior to
obtaining a final prosecution decision from one of these
officials.^[^145^](#fn145){#fnref145 .footnote-ref}^

**B. Content of Comey's Unilateral Announcement**

We identified two significant substantive concerns with the content of

Comey's July 5 statement. First, Comey included criticism of former
Secretary Clinton's uncharged conduct, including calling her "extremely
careless," thereby violating longstanding Department practice to avoid
what others described as "trashing people we're not charging."
Second, having improperly decided to comment on what were prosecutorial
decisions, Comey proceeded to inadequately and incompletely explain how
the Department's prosecutors applied the relevant statutory provisions
and why they believed the evidence was insufficient to support a
prosecution. For example, Comey described former Secretary Clinton's
handling of classified information as "extremely careless" but then
asserted that such conduct did not amount to "gross negligence" under
the relevant statute. In so doing, Comey failed to explain that, since
at least 2008, it had been the

Department's position that, before bringing a "gross negligence" case,
prosecutors had to be able to prove that a defendant knew at the time
that the information was gathered, transmitted, or lost that it was in
fact classified information. As delivered, Comey's statement led to
greater public confusion and second guessing, not greater public
clarity.

Many of the problems with the statement resulted from Comey's failure to
coordinate with Department officials. By deciding not to consult with
the Midyear prosecutors about their assessment of the Department's
historical approach to and interpretation of the "gross negligence"
statute or their assessment of the evidence under the applicable legal
standard, Comey lost the opportunity to hear the views of the career
prosecutors responsible for prosecuting violations of the mishandling
statutes. Based on our interviews, these prosecutors would likely have
warned him about the substantive questions presented by his statement.
In addition,

Department witnesses told the OIG that the presentation of the case by
the Midyear prosecutors at the briefing of the Attorney General on July
6, 2016, which is described in Chapter Six, differed significantly from
Comey's statement, leading these witnesses to conclude that the
presentation of the facts in Comey's statement was "very skewed" or
delivered with a "slant."

*Description of Uncharged Conduct*

It is not unprecedented for the Department to announce the completion of
an investigation without a prosecution. In fact, it happens frequently
in high profile matters, including in many federal civil rights
investigations. Such an announcement may serve several legitimate
purposes, including allowing the public to know that the Department
thoroughly investigated the matter and lifting the cloud over an
individual known to have been under investigation. In limited instances,
the Department has included criticism of individuals not charged with a
crime. Comey cited as precedent for his July 5 public statement the June
2004 press conference by then DAG Comey summarizing the evidence against
Jose

Padilla, who was designated as an enemy combatant, and the Department's
October 2015 letter to Congress summarizing the results of the criminal
investigation into IRS officials, which did not result in criminal
charges. However, in both of those instances, the *Department* was
responsible for issuing the statement, not the FBI Director.

Moreover, Comey's announcement was unusual in that it concentrated in
substantial part on criticizing former Secretary Clinton's uncharged
conduct. This was contrary to longstanding Department practice and
protocol. Witnesses told us that criticizing individuals for conduct
that does not warrant prosecution is something that the Department
simply does not do. For example, Toscas stated, "We don't say we're
closing something, but let me tell you some bad stuff that we saw along
the way, but it doesn't rise to the level of bringing a case. We just
don't do it." Prosecutor 1 characterized the negative comments about
former Secretary Clinton as "declining to prosecute someone and then
sort of dirtying them up with facts that you develop along the way."

Department witnesses did not identify a specific regulation or USAM
provision that required Comey to refrain from commenting on uncharged
conduct, and we found none. Rather, witnesses described this as a
practice that is "ingrained" in every Department prosecutor. This
principle underlies other Department policies and practices that do not
directly apply in these circumstances, but that are nonetheless salient.
USAM 9-27.760 requires prosecutors to remain sensitive to the privacy
and reputation interests of uncharged third parties---for example, by
not identifying or causing a defendant to identify a third-party
wrongdoer by name or description in public plea and sentencing
proceedings, without the express approval of the U.S. Attorney and the
appropriate Assistant Attorney General prior to the hearing absent
exigent circumstances. USAM 9-27.760 states, "In other less predictable
contexts, federal prosecutors should strive to avoid unnecessary public
references to wrongdoing by uncharged third-parties."

Similarly, when a case is closed without charges being filed, the
Department does not seek to unseal a search warrant for the purpose of
revealing to the public that there was probable cause that someone
engaged in criminal activity. In addition, where the Department has
concluded that an uncharged individual was a participant in a criminal
conspiracy, the Department's rules specifically prohibit prosecutors
from naming the uncharged co-conspirator in an indictment or including
sufficient detail in public filings that would allow the co-conspirator
to be identified. *See*, *e.g.*, USAM 9-11.130. The common principle
underlying these policies is that neither the FBI nor Department
prosecutors are permitted to insinuate or allege that an individual who
has not been charged with a crime is nevertheless guilty of some
wrongdoing. We see no reason why an unindicted coconspirator should be
afforded greater protection than a person who has been investigated and
found not to be criminally liable. We therefore recommend that the
Department and the FBI consider adopting a policy addressing the
appropriateness of Department employees discussing uncharged conduct in
public statements.

Several witnesses acknowledged that one major purpose of including
negative comments about former Secretary Clinton was to send the message
that the FBI was not condoning her conduct: essentially, to protect the
FBI from criticism that it failed to recognize the seriousness of her
conduct and was "letting her off the hook." We recognize that this
investigation was subject to scrutiny not typical of the average
criminal case, but that does not provide a basis for violating
well-established Department norms and, essentially, "trashing" the
subject of an investigation with uncharged misconduct that Comey, every
agent, and every prosecutor agreed did not warrant prosecution. Such
norms exist for important reasons and none of the justifications
provided by witnesses for why such criticism was warranted in the
Midyear investigation---including expressing disapproval of former
Secretary Clinton's conduct to the FBI workforce, "countering"
statements made on the campaign trail that the emails in question were
classified after the fact, or informing the American people about the
facts of the investigation--- provided legitimate reasons to depart from
normal and appropriate Department practice.

*Substantive Issues with the Statement*

Department witnesses told the OIG that they considered Comey's statement
to be both factually and legally incomplete. These witnesses said that
critical facts supporting the decision to decline prosecution were not
included in Comey's statement. Axelrod told the OIG that Comey's most
notable omission was the failure to explain that the Department has
never prosecuted mishandling violations "where the classified
information was shared between people who work for the Government..
That's a pretty important fact." Axelrod and other Department witnesses
also noted that Comey did not include information explaining that "the
majority of the emails that turned out to be classified had been sent
late at night or on the weekends," suggesting that State Department
employees sending the emails tried to "talk around" classified
information in the course of doing their jobs. Department witnesses
described the characterization of the evidence in Comey's statement as
"very skewed" or unintentionally "slanted."

Comey also included in his statement a comment that although the FBI did
not find direct evidence that former Secretary Clinton's private email
account was hacked, the FBI assessed that it was "possible" that hostile
actors gained access to former Secretary Clinton's personal email
account based on various factors. He added that the FBI assessed it
would be unlikely to see such direct evidence given the nature of the
system and the actors potentially involved in hostile intrusions, and
that former Secretary Clinton had used her personal email in the
territory of foreign adversaries. The statement thus insinuated that
hostile foreign actors may have in fact gained access to former
Secretary Clinton's private email account, based almost entirely on
speculation and without any evidence from the Midyear investigation to
support his claim. As described in Chapter Five, the FBI Midyear
Forensics Agent told the OIG that, although he did not believe there was
"any way of determining.100%" whether Clinton's servers had been
compromised, he felt "fairly confident that there wasn't an intrusion."
The LHM summarizing the Midyear investigation similarly stated, "FBI
investigation and forensic analysis did not find evidence confirming
that Clinton's email server systems were compromised by cyber means."

In addition, Comey's statement failed to describe accurately what the
Midyear prosecutors deemed was essential to make out a violation of the
"gross negligence" statute. As described in Chapters Two and Seven, the
Midyear prosecutors took into account the legislative history of the
statute, previous military prosecutions and indictments brought under
it, and the Department's historical interpretation of the provision in
declinations dating to at least 2008. Based on this authority, the
Midyear prosecutors determined that a violation of Section 793(f)(1)
requires (1) a state of mind that is "just a little short of being
willful," "criminally reckless," or "so gross as to almost suggest
deliberate intention," and (2) evidence that the individuals who sent
emails containing classified information did so "knowingly." With
respect to former Secretary Clinton, the Midyear prosecutors determined
that in the absence of evidence showing that she knew that emails she
received contained classified information, such as through obvious
classification markings, Department practice and precedent required that
they decline prosecution.

Comey told the OIG that he understood Section 793(f)(1) to require
"something closer to actual knowledge." Yet nowhere in his statement did
Comey say that the FBI concluded that former Secretary Clinton lacked
knowledge that the information in question was classified, and that
prosecutors determined that evidence of such knowledge was needed to
bring charges under the "gross negligence" statute. On July 6, 2016,
Prosecutor 3 sent an email to the other Midyear prosecutors highlighting
this problem. He stated:

It's unfortunate that Comey didn't differentiate the standard of proof
between 793(f) and the other statutes. He glossed over all with mention
of the absence of intent and made no mention of the necessity of proving
knowledge of classified information with regard to 793(f) and why
that proof was deficient. By using the phrase "extremely careless" he
lit up the talking heads last night, many of whom opined that such
verbiage warranted a gross negligence charge and that Comey was giving
Clinton an unwarranted pass. Even the socalled legal experts didn't seem
to understand the elements of that statute and why it did not apply to
the facts.

By describing former Secretary Clinton's conduct as "extremely careless"
while failing to explain what the Midyear team concluded was the lack of
proof for the other requirements of Section 793(f)(1), Comey created
confusion about the FBI's assessment of her culpability and the reasons
for recommending that prosecution be declined. The focus on former
Secretary Clinton's "extremely careless" handling of classified
information foreseeably and predictably led the public to question why
former Secretary Clinton was not being charged with "gross negligence."

The issue for the Midyear prosecutors was never whether former Secretary
Clinton's conduct was "extremely careless," but whether her conduct met
the requirements for charging a violation of Section 793(f)---*i.e.*,
whether there was sufficient evidence to establish that she knowingly
included classified information on her unclassified private email
server, or learned that classified information was transferred to her
unclassified server and failed to report it. The prosecutors concluded
that there was not. As described in Chapter Seven below, the prosecutors
found no evidence that former Secretary Clinton believed or was aware
that the emails contained classified information, or had concerns about
the information included in unclassified emails sent to her.

### 0.0.1. C. Lynch's Decision Not to Recuse after the Tarmac Meeting

After the tarmac meeting with former President Clinton, Lynch obtained
an opinion from the Departmental Ethics Office that she was not legally
required to recuse herself from the Midyear investigation. Although the
opinion was not memorialized in writing, former OAG staff and former
officials in the Departmental Ethics Office confirmed that Lynch
obtained this opinion, and that the conclusion was that recusal was not
required. Lynch was entitled to rely on that ethics opinion in the face
of subsequent questions about her involvement in the Midyear
investigation.

Lynch told the OIG that she considered voluntarily recusing herself.
However, she thought that doing so would create the impression that
something inappropriate had occurred during her conversation with former
President Clinton. Lynch said that she felt a responsibility to remain
involved in the Midyear investigation, because if she decided to recuse
herself, she would be "asking someone else to step up and endure all the
hits the Department will take for the case for the result, whatever it
is."

Lynch said that she applied her usual process in the Midyear
investigation, and that her role did not change after the tarmac
meeting. Lynch told the OIG that the only thing that differed was that
she decided to speak publicly about how the Department's process
typically works. However, Lynch's July 1, 2016 statements at the Aspen
Institute were confusing and created the impression that, while she
would not formally recuse from the investigation, she also would not
remain in a deciding role in the investigation (by stating "I will be
accepting their recommendations"). In an effort to address the
confusion, Lynch sought to clarify her remarks by providing the reporter
with another formulation of her intentions, stating, "I can't imagine a
circumstance in which I would not be accepting their recommendations."
However, these statements continued to make it appear that Lynch would
cede her decisionmaking authority to the career staff and the FBI
Director in a way that was akin to some type of recusal.

In our view, Lynch should have either made it unambiguously clear that
she did not believe there was a basis for recusal and that she was going
to remain the final decisionmaker (thereby making her accountable for
the final decision, not Comey), or recused herself and allowed Yates to
serve as Acting Attorney General, or sought a special counsel
appointment. Instead, Lynch took none of these actions, leaving it
ambiguous to the public as to what her role would be.

Ultimately, that left the public with the perception that the FBI
Director, and not the Attorney General, was accountable for the
declination decision.

**D. Lynch's Response to Comey's Notification**

As described above, Comey concealed his plans to make a public statement
from senior Department officials, and instructed his subordinates to do
the same. He did not inform Lynch and Yates of his plans to hold a press
conference until the morning of July 5, 2016. Comey intentionally left
Department leadership a short time to respond to his information,
admitting that he did this to avoid having them tell him not to do it.

Comey notified Lynch and Yates of his plans only after first contacting
the press. He did not tell Lynch what he planned to say when she asked.
According to Lynch, Comey told her he would not go over his statement
with her so they both could say that it was not coordinated. Department
officials understandably had concerns about directing Comey to cancel
the press conference after he had already announced his plans to hold
one.

Lynch said while Comey told her that his statement would be about the
Midyear investigation, it did not occur to her that Comey would announce
the end of the investigation or the FBI's recommendation. She explained
that while she knew that former Secretary Clinton had been interviewed,
she was not aware that the investigation was considered complete. Lynch
told the OIG that if she had known what Comey was planning to do, she
would have told him to stop. However, Lynch said that she trusted him
based on her long relationship with Comey and his comment to her that it
would be better if they could both say that they did not coordinate his
statement. Lynch told the OIG that she thought this was a reasonable
decision, and that it was the right decision under the circumstances
because the Comey she knew followed the rules. She said that once Comey
started speaking and she realized what he was doing, she had "no way to
stop him at that point, I mean, short of, you know, dashing across the
street and unplugging something."

Nonetheless, we found that Lynch retained authority over both the final
prosecutive decision and the Department's management of the Midyear
investigation. This included the authority to insist that Comey share
his statement with her and allow the Department to review and comment on
it. Although we recognize that Comey made it impracticable for her to
tell him not to make any statement given the FBI had already notified
the press, there was time still available for her to review his proposed
statement and to instruct him to make changes to it. Even if Lynch did
not think that Comey was going to announce that the FBI was closing its
Midyear investigation, Comey told her the statement was going to be
about the Midyear investigation, a case over which she retained the
authority and responsibility as the Attorney General. As such, we
believe she should have instructed Comey to tell her what he intended to
say beforehand, and should have discussed it with Comey.

**PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY**

BLANK
=====

**CHAPTER SEVEN: THE DEPARTMENT'S DECISION NOT TO PROSECUTE**

After former Director Comey's statement on July 5, 2016, the Midyear
prosecutors finalized their analysis and conclusions under the relevant
statutes, recommending that prosecution of former Secretary Clinton and
others be declined. They then provided their conclusions to NSD
supervisors.

On the afternoon of July 6, 2016, former AG Lynch held a briefing
attended by Comey, McCabe, and other senior Department and FBI
officials. The Midyear prosecutors briefed Lynch on the relevant
evidence, the applicable statutes, and the basis for their
recommendations. Following the briefing, the Department issued a brief
statement announcing that Lynch had accepted the recommendation of the
career prosecutors and agents who worked on the Midyear investigation.

In this chapter we discuss the prosecutors' conclusions and the July 6
briefing, focusing on issues that have been subject to public criticism.
Consistent with the role of the OIG and our statement that we will not
substitute the OIG's judgment for the judgments made by the Department
or the FBI regarding the substantive merits of investigative or
prosecutive decisions, we reviewed whether there was evidence that the
Department's decision to decline prosecution was based on improper
considerations or bias. As with our review of investigative decisions,
our role was not to determine whether a prosecution should or should not
have been brought but rather whether the Department's explanations for
its declination decision were not unreasonable and whether there was
evidence that the justifications offered for the decision were a pretext
for improper, but unstated, considerations.

**I. The Declination Recommendation**

As described above, prosecutors and NSD supervisors began to realize
that the investigation could lead to a declination in early 2016. As the
investigation continued into the Spring of 2016, the prosecutors began
to consider how to summarize the investigation and memorialize their
legal conclusions to provide to their supervisors and to Department
leadership. The prosecutors told the OIG that they wanted to wait until
the end of the investigation before making a charging recommendation.

The prosecutors planned to complete their legal analysis after former
Secretary Clinton was interviewed on July 2, 2016. Following Comey's
announcement on July 5, 2016, they realized they had a much shorter time
period to do so and worked until almost midnight on July 5 to finish
their legal analysis. They completed this process the following
afternoon and provided their analysis and conclusions to Toscas.

The prosecutors' legal analysis referenced an FBI letterhead memorandum
(LHM) summarizing the Midyear investigation.^[^146^](#fn146){#fnref146
.footnote-ref}^ In their analysis, the Midyear prosecutors categorized
the witnesses that had been interviewed in the investigation into four
categories:

- Originators of classified information (*i.e.*, individuals who
    introduced classified information into unclassified emails,
    including State Department Bureau of Public Affairs employees, an
    individual who regularly interfaced with State Department employees,
    State

Department Operations Center employees, and other State

Department employees responsible for conveying information to their
superiors);

- U.S. government employees who had involvement with a specific Top

Secret//Special Access Program ("TS//SAP");

- Senior aides to former Secretary Clinton, including Huma Abedin,

Cheryl Mills, and Jake Sullivan; and  Former Secretary Clinton herself.

The prosecutors referred to the first three categories of
witnesses---the Originators, the officials involved with the TS//SAP,
and former Secretary Clinton's senior aides---collectively as the
"senders."

The prosecutors analyzed the conduct of former Secretary Clinton and the
"senders" under five statutes:

- 18 U.S.C. §§ 793(d) and 793(e) (willful mishandling of documents or
    information relating to the national defense);
- 18 U.S.C. § 793(f) (removal, loss, theft, abstraction, or
    destruction of documents or information relating to the national
    defense through gross negligence, or failure to report such removal,
    loss, theft, abstraction, or destruction);
- 18 U.S.C. § 1924 (unauthorized removal and retention of classified
    documents or material by government employees); and
- 18 U.S.C. § 2071 (concealment, removal, or mutilation of government
    records).

The requirements of these statutes are described in more detail in
Chapter Three.

As summarized below, the Midyear prosecutors concluded that there was
not a basis to prosecute former Secretary Clinton, her senior aides, or
others under any of these statutes. The prosecutors cited the following
factual conclusions from the investigation as critical to its
recommendation not to prosecute:

- None of the emails contained clear classification markings as
    required under Executive Order 13526 and its predecessor. Only three
    email chains contained any classification markings of any kind.
    These email chains had one or two paragraphs that were marked "(C)"
    for "Confidential" but contained none of the other required
    markings, such as classification headers.
- There was no evidence that the senders or former Secretary Clinton
    believed or were aware at the time that the emails contained
    classified information. In the absence of clear classification
    markings, the prosecutors determined that it would be difficult to
    dispute the sincerity of these witnesses' stated beliefs that the
    material was not classified.
- The senders and former Secretary Clinton relied on the judgment of
    employees experienced in protecting sensitive information to
    properly handle classified information.
- The emails in question were sent to other government officials in
    furtherance of the senders' official duties. There was no evidence
    that the senders or former Secretary Clinton intended that
    classified information be sent to unauthorized recipients, or that
    they intentionally sought to store classified information on
    unauthorized systems.
- There was no evidence that former Secretary Clinton had any
    contemporaneous concerns about the classified status of the
    information that was conveyed on her unclassified systems, nor any
    evidence that any individual ever contemporaneously conveyed such
    concerns to her.
- Although some witnesses expressed concern or surprise when they saw
    some of the classified content in unclassified emails, the
    prosecutors concluded that the investigation did not reveal evidence
    that any U.S. government employees involved in the SAP willfully
    communicated the information to a person not entitled to receive it,
    or willfully retained the same.
- The senders used unclassified emails because of "operational tempo,"
    that is, the need to get information quickly to senior State
    Department officials at times when the recipients lacked access to
    classified systems. To accomplish this, senders often refrained from
    using specific classified facts or terms in emails and worded emails
    carefully in an attempt to avoid transmitting classified
    information.
- There was no evidence that Clinton set up her servers or private
    email account with the intent of communicating or retaining
    classified information, or that she had knowledge that classified
    information would be communicated or retained on it.

In addition to these facts as described by the prosecutors, various
witnesses told us that one reason it was difficult to establish intent
was that the mishandling of classified information was a persistent
practice at the State Department. These practices made it difficult for
the Midyear team to conclude that particular individuals had the
necessary criminal intent to mishandle classified materials. According
to Prosecutor 4, "The problem was the State Department was so
screwed up in the way they treated classified information that if you
wanted to prosecute Hillary Clinton, you would have had to prosecute 150
State Department people."

Based on facts evincing a lack of intent to communicate classified
information on unclassified systems, the prosecutors concluded that
there was no basis to recommend prosecution of former Secretary Clinton
or the senders of classified information under Sections 793(d) or (e).

In addition, as described in Chapter Two, prosecutors reviewed the
legislative history of the gross negligence provision in Section
793(f)(1) and court decisions impacting the interpretation of it. The
prosecutors noted that the congressional debate at the time the
predecessor to Section 793(f)(1) was passed indicated that conduct
charged under the provision must be "so gross as to almost suggest
deliberate intention," criminally reckless, or "something that falls
just a little short of being willful." The prosecutors also reviewed
military and federal court cases and previous prosecutions under Section
793(f)(1), and concluded that they involved either a defendant who
knowingly removed classified information from a secure facility, or
inadvertently removed classified information from a secure facility and,
upon learning this, failed to report its "loss, theft, abstraction, or
destruction." In addition, based on a review of constitutional vagueness
challenges of Sections 793(d) and (e), the Midyear prosecutors observed
that "the government would very likely face a colorable constitutional
challenge to the statute if it prosecuted an individual for gross
negligence who was both unaware he had removed classified information at
the time of the removal and never became aware he had done so."

The prosecutors concluded that based on case law and the Department's
prior interpretation of the statute, charging a violation of Section
793(f) likely required evidence that the individuals who sent emails
containing classified information "knowingly" included the classified
information or transferred classified information onto unclassified
systems (Section 793(f)(1)), or learned that classified information had
been transferred to unclassified systems and failed to report it
(Section 793(f)(2)).

Applying this interpretation, the prosecutors concluded that there was
no evidence that the senders of emails knew that classified information
had been improperly transferred to an unclassified system, or that
former Secretary Clinton acted in a grossly negligent manner with
respect to receiving emails determined to contain classified
information. According to information reviewed by the OIG, the
prosecutors also considered whether the decision to conduct official
business using a personal server could itself constitute gross
negligence, but concluded that there was no evidence that former
Secretary Clinton ever considered the possibility that classified
information would be present in unclassified emails or on her private
email server.

Distinguishing military prosecutions for "grossly negligent"
mishandling, the prosecutors also noted that there was no evidence that
classified emails were provided to or discovered by people who were
unauthorized to receive them. The prosecutors stated, "All of the
emails containing information subsequently determined to be classified
were sent for work purposes and were delivered to

State Department or other U.S. government officials."

Regarding Section 1924, the prosecutors stated that the statute requires
proof that an individual knew of the removal of classified information
and intended to retain that information in an unauthorized location, and
that such proof was lacking. The prosecutors cited the absence of
classification markings on the emails sent by the senders, with the
exception of the three emails forwarded to Clinton containing paragraph
markings denoting Confidential information, as well as the lack of
evidence that the senders knowingly took classified information and sent
it in unmarked emails over unclassified systems. The prosecutors
similarly concluded that former Secretary Clinton did not recognize or
have reason to believe that the information sent to her contained
classified information. Prosecutors cited Clinton's reliance on the
judgment of senior aides and other State Department staff, their
attempts to talk around sensitive information in unclassified emails,
and her testimony that she did not have reason to question their use of
unclassified systems to send that information. The prosecutors concluded
that the evidence was insufficient to charge former Secretary Clinton
under Section 1924.

The prosecutors also concluded that there was insufficient evidence to
support prosecution under 18 U.S.C. § 2071, which prohibits the willful
concealment, removal, or destruction of federal records. They concluded
that there was insufficient evidence to establish beyond a reasonable
doubt that former Secretary Clinton or her senior aides intended to
conceal records, citing testimony that these witnesses expected that any
emails sent to a state.gov address would be preserved. The prosecutors
acknowledged that this testimony was undercut by former Secretary
Clinton's admission that she sometimes communicated with her senior
aides using their personal email accounts, as well as an email she
received from former Secretary of State Colin Powell at the beginning of
her tenure outlining his use of personal email. However, the prosecutors
noted that Section 2071 had "never been used to prosecute individuals
for attempting to avoid Federal Records

Act requirements by failing to ensure that government records are filed
appropriately."

Finally, the prosecutors evaluated whether Mills and Samuelson
intentionally deleted emails during the culling process used to separate
former Secretary

Clinton's "personal" and "work-related" emails for production to the
State Department. They concluded that there was no evidence that emails
intentionally were deleted by former Secretary Clinton's lawyers to
conceal the presence of classified information on former Secretary
Clinton's server, particularly because some of the emails produced as
"work-related" later were determined to contain highly classified,
compartmented information.

**II. The Attorney General Briefing**

A briefing for Lynch and Yates on the prosecutors' recommendation was
held in the Attorney General's Conference Room at 4 p.m. on July 6,
2016. According to the prosecutors, they learned about the briefing
after they completed their legal analysis, and had only a short time to
prepare. Prosecutors 1 and 2 said they quickly divided the topics and
prepared bullet points for the presentation based on their legal
analysis.

Attending the briefing were Lynch, Yates, Axelrod, and David Margolis,
at the time the most senior career official in ODAG, as well as several
OAG and ODAG staff members. Toscas and Laufman were present from NSD,
while Carlin participated by phone. Present from the FBI were Comey,
McCabe, Rybicki, Baker, FBI Attorney 1, and Strzok. All four prosecutors
attended the briefing.

Toscas told the OIG that he gave a brief introduction at the meeting.
Toscas prepared handwritten talking points that he used as a guide for
his comments at the meeting, but he said that these did not end up being
his "precise script." Toscas said that he "frontloaded" his comments
with an acknowledgement that Lynch had stated publicly that she planned
to accept the recommendation of the career staff, and that the
prosecutors and the FBI were in agreement that no charges should be
filed. According to Toscas's handwritten talking points, he stated,
"At the conclusion of the meeting you will have the unanimous
recommendation of the FBI and DOJ team that this investigation
should be closed and that charges should not be brought against
anybody within the scope of the investigation in this matter."

The notes indicate that Toscas then praised the team and handed the
briefing over to Laufman to introduce the prosecutors. Following their
introduction, Prosecutors 1 and 2 walked through the various legal
statutes and the facts developed in the investigation. Prosecutor 2
handled sections 793(d) and (e), while Prosecutor 1 handled discussion
of the other statutes, including the gross negligence provision.

Lynch described the briefing as "very, very thorough." She said that it
lasted about an hour-and-a-half, and included a "very specific, very
dense" briefing of the case. Lynch told the OIG that the prosecutors
showed her various documents, including some of the emails that were
determined to contain classified information. She said that she asked
questions about access to the classified emails and who saw them, as
well as numerous questions that related to the issue of intent. Lynch
described the prosecutors as "very responsive" to her questions.

Lynch told the OIG that the meeting included a briefing on key
interviews, including the interview of former Secretary Clinton. Lynch
said that the prosecutors provided a synopsis of her interview, her
reaction when shown documents, and their opinions about what she said.
Lynch said that she asked whether any of the witnesses, including former
Secretary Clinton, had engaged in obstruction of justice, committed
perjury, or made false statements, and she was told that they had not.

Prosecutor 1 told the OIG that the discussion with Lynch about Secretary
Clinton's interview included whether Clinton was credible when she
testified that (C) paragraph markings in an email could mean
subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C), rather than that the paragraph
contained information classified at the "Confidential" level. Prosecutor
1 stated that he told Lynch that Clinton's testimony "strained credulity
a little bit because, well, if anyone knows Confidential, the State
Department is the entity that uses Confidential information a lot." He
said that they discussed with Lynch that their reaction to this
explanation was skeptical, but that they also did not know what "people
at the very highest levels" understood about classification markings.

Prosecutor 4 said that he recalled Yates also asking whether former

Secretary Clinton was truthful in her interview, and that they all
responded that she was. He said that this answer caused him some
"consternation" but that he did not disagree.^[^147^](#fn147){#fnref147
.footnote-ref}^ Asked to explain this statement, Prosecutor 4 told the
OIG that he did not think that former Secretary Clinton lied in a
provable way, but that her responses to questions about paragraph
markings for information designated as "Confidential" and her statement
that the private server was set up for convenience were questionable.
Prosecutor 4 stated, "My view was and still remains that the private
email server was set up to avoid FOIA.. If you look at Colin
Powell's email, he pretty much was trying to avoid FOIA too."

Various witnesses told the OIG that the briefing included legal
discussion of the gross negligence provision, and that prosecutors
fielded questions from Comey and Baker about the provision. Prosecutor 2
stated:

I think their attorneys hadn't really gotten him up to speed on the
prior use of 793(f), and how it hadn't been used, and the Department's
views on the statute. So I think it was kind of an opportunity for him
and his team to figure out how Comey was going to explain the decision
to Congress under 793(f). And following the briefing, questions from
his team came our way, specifically about 793(f).

Prosecutor 1 similarly told the OIG that Comey was "very interested" in
section

793(f), and that "a lot of notebooks came out from the Bureau" when
Prosecutor 1 began to talk about the provision. Prosecutor 1 stated that
his briefing about section 793(f) included "what kind of factors we
considered., what gross negligence meant in the criminal context,
what it meant in the statute, and how it had been applied in the
Uniform Code of Military Justice."

Witnesses told the OIG that they did not discuss Comey's statement at
the briefing. However, Yates said that she recalled thinking that "you'd
kind of wonder if it's the same case" when she heard the facts as laid
out by the prosecutors at the briefing and compared them to Comey's
statement. She said that she recalled discussing with Axelrod, Lynch,
and Carlin after the briefing whether the briefing impacted what Comey's
thinking was about the case and how those facts were cast in his
statement.

Witnesses said that at the end of the discussion, Lynch went around the
room and asked for people's opinions to see if anyone objected to
declining prosecution. According to several witnesses, Margolis
responded that he did not see a prosecutable case, and that if the
Department prosecuted former Secretary Clinton, it would be because she
was a high-profile public official. Toscas, Baker, and Comey said that
Margolis described this as "celebrity hunting." Lynch said that she
recalled that Margolis then said, "We at the Department don't do
that.. We will bring cases when they should be brought. We don't when
they shouldn't be brought."

Lynch told the OIG that after everyone had the opportunity to provide
his or her opinion, she expressed her appreciation to the team and asked
Comey and Strzok to convey her appreciation to the agents who had worked
on the case. She said that she then told the group that she accepted the
recommendation to decline prosecution, and that the Department would
issue a statement reflecting the decision shortly. Lynch said that about
half of the group stayed behind to talk about how to announce the
declination, and that Toscas drafted a short statement. That afternoon,
the Department released the following statement:

Late this afternoon, I met with the FBI Director James Comey and career
prosecutors and agents who conducted the investigation of Secretary
Hillary Clinton's use of a personal email system during her time as
Secretary of State. I received and accepted their unanimous
recommendation that the thorough, year-long investigation be closed and
that no charges be brought against any individuals within the scope of
the investigation.

**III. Analysis**

We analyzed the Department's decision to decline to prosecute former
Secretary Clinton or anyone else according to the same analytical
standard that we applied to other decisions made during the
investigation. We sought to determine whether the declination decision
was based on improper considerations, including political bias. We both
looked for direct evidence of improper considerations and analyzed the
justifications offered for the decision to determine whether they were a
pretext for improper, but unstated, considerations. We did not
substitute the OIG's judgment for the judgments made by the Department.

We found that the prosecutors' decision was based on their assessment of
the facts, the law, and past Department practice in cases involving
these statutes. We did not identify evidence of bias or improper
considerations. Our analysis focuses substantially on 18 U.S.C. §
793(f)(1), the "gross negligence" statute that has been the focus of
much criticism of the Department's decision. However, we first address
the declination decision with respect to the other statutes that the
Department considered.

We begin with 18 U.S.C. §§ 793(d) and (e), which prohibit the "willful"
mishandling or retention of classified information. As detailed in
Chapter Two, Courts have interpreted "willfully" to mean an act done
"intentionally and purposely and with the intent to do something the law
forbids, that is, with the bad purpose to disobey or to disregard the
law." All of the prosecutors and agents we asked told us that they could
not prove that Clinton had actual knowledge that the emails in question
were classified or that Clinton used private servers and a private email
account with the purpose or intent of receiving classified information
on them. None of the emails Clinton received were properly marked to
inform her of the classified status of the
information.^[^148^](#fn148){#fnref148 .footnote-ref}^ Additionally,
investigators found evidence of a conscious effort to avoid sending
classified information by writing around the most sensitive material.
The investigators did not find any emails in which the sender
communicated information to someone not authorized to receive it. In
brief, we found no evidence that the decision not to prosecute Clinton
under these statutory provisions was tainted by bias or other improper
considerations.

We reached a similar conclusion with respect to 18 U.S.C. § 1924, which,
as described in Chapter Two, prohibits the "knowing" removal of
classified information with "intent to retain" it in an unauthorized
location. In determining that a Section 1924 prosecution was not viable,
the prosecutors pointed to the same absence of evidence that Clinton had
actual knowledge that any of the emails were classified or that she used
private servers and a private email account with the purpose or intent
of receiving classified information on them. The prosecutors
distinguished the Petraeus case brought under this section (discussed in
Chapter Two) on the basis that this case involved clear evidence that
the defendant knew the information at issue was classified and took
actions reflecting knowledge that his handling or storage of it was
improper. This was precisely the evidence that the investigators told us
was conspicuously absent in the Midyear case. We found no basis to
conclude that the decision not to pursue a Section 1924 case was tainted
by bias or other improper considerations.

The Department also determined that prosecution under 18 U.S.C. § 2071
was not viable. Section 2071 prohibits the concealment, removal, or
destruction of a record filed in a public office. The prosecutors
concluded that, as to emails on the Clinton servers that were sent to or
from government email accounts, because they also existed on government
systems there was no evidence that Clinton or anyone else took any
actions to conceal, remove, or destroy them from the government systems
on which they resided. As to the work-related emails that were not sent
to or from any government system, the prosecutors concluded that such
emails were never "filed within a public office." The prosecutors also
noted that every prosecution under Section 2071 involved the removal or
destruction of documents that had already been filed or deposited in a
public office. Additionally, the prosecutors found no evidence that the
laptop "culling" process involved the intentional destruction of
government records in an effort to conceal them in violation of Section
2071. We did not identify any evidence to suggest that these
determinations were based on bias or other improper considerations.

The statute that required the most complex analysis by the prosecutors
was 18 U.S.C. § 793(f)(1), which criminalizes the removal, delivery,
loss, theft, abstraction, or destruction of national defense information
through "gross negligence." Due in part to Comey's July 5 statement
criticizing Clinton for being "extremely careless," which many observers
equated with being "grossly negligent," this provision became the focus
of much of the questioning of the declination decision. As detailed
above, the prosecutors identified statements in the legislative history
of Section 793(f)(1) that they found indicated that the state of mind
required for a violation of that section is "so gross as to almost
suggest deliberate intention," criminally reckless, or "something that
falls just short of being willful." In addition, based on a review of
constitutional vagueness challenges of Sections 793(d) and (e), the
Midyear prosecutors stated that "the government would very likely face a
colorable constitutional challenge to the statute if it prosecuted an
individual for gross negligence who was both unaware he had removed
classified information at the time of the removal and never became aware
he had done so." Based on all of these circumstances, and a review of
the small number of prior civilian and military cases under Section
793(f), the prosecutors interpreted the "gross negligence" provision of
Section 793(f)(1) to require proof that an individual acted with
knowledge that the information in question was classified. The
investigators and prosecutors told us that proof of such knowledge was
lacking.

We found that the prosecutors' interpretation of the requirements of
Section 793(f)(1) was consistent with prior Department declination
decisions that the prosecutors considered and that we reviewed. As noted
in Chapter Two, in 2008 the Department declined to prosecute former
Attorney General Gonzales based on an interpretation that would have
required them to prove that his state of mind was "criminally reckless,"
or that he had "a state of mind approaching 'deliberate intention' to
remove classified documents from a secure location." The same year, the
Department declined prosecution of an AUSA for mishandling classified
information because of its inability to prove that he was "criminally
reckless." Prosecutors told the OIG that they reviewed these declination
decisions to see how the Department had construed Section 793(f)(1) in
the past. These prior cases demonstrate that the interpretation of the
gross negligence requirement of Section 793(f)(1) used as a basis to
decline prosecution of former Secretary Clinton was consistent with
interpretations applied in prior cases under different leadership.

We found no evidence that the conclusions by Department prosecutors were
affected by bias or other improper considerations; rather, we concluded
that they were based on the prosecutors' assessment of the facts, the
law, and past Department practice. In reaching this conclusion, we
recognize that much of the questioning of the Department's prosecutorial
decision in this case has focused on whether the Department too narrowly
interpreted the "gross negligence" provision of Section 793(f)(1) and
should have pursued a prosecution because the FBI found Clinton to be
"extremely careless." That, however, is a legal and policy judgment
involving core prosecutorial discretion for the Department to make.

**PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY**

BLANK
=====

**CHAPTER EIGHT: OCTOBER EFFORTS BY FBI LEADERSHIP TO RESPOND TO
CRITICISM OF THE MIDYEAR INVESTIGATION**

During October 2016, we found that FBI leadership devoted significant
time and attention responding to both internal and external interest in,
and criticism of, the Midyear investigation.^[^149^](#fn149){#fnref149
.footnote-ref}^ This included remarks by Comey about the Midyear
investigation at the FBI's SAC Conference, the development of Midyear
talking points for all FBI SACs, a Midyear briefing for the Society of
Former Special Agents of the FBI, and continued monitoring of media
discussion of the Midyear investigation.

As described in Chapter Nine, these events occurred immediately after
FBI Headquarters and the FBI Midyear team were made aware of the
potential significance of the Weiner laptop by the FBI's New York Field
Office (NYO) on September 28 and 29. And as we further describe in
Chapter Nine, at the same time that FBI leadership was taking the steps
we describe in this chapter to defend its handling of the Midyear
investigation as thorough and complete, it was taking no action in
response to the notification by NYO regarding the Weiner laptop.

**I. SAC Conference (October 11 to 14)**

The FBI held its annual SAC Conference in San Diego, California, from
October 11 through October 14. The SAC Conference was immediately
followed by the International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP)
Conference from October 15 through October 18. Almost the entire FBI
executive workforce attends the SAC Conference and top leadership
frequently stays for the IACP Conference as well. Comey and McCabe
attended both of the conferences in San Diego.

On October 12, Comey spoke to the SAC Conference about a variety of
topics. This speech included lengthy remarks about the Midyear
investigation. In part, he stated:

I do want to hit Hillary Clinton's emails which I never tire of talking
about, as you know. Because I want to make sure that you are equipped
especially to answer questions and comments from our formers who are out
trapped in a Fox News bubble and are hearing all kinds of nonsense. I
want to make sure you have the information you need to bat some of that
stuff down..

At the end of the investigation, the team's view of it was there
really isn't anything here that anybody would prosecute. My view was the
same. Everybody between me and the people who worked this case felt the
same way about it. It was not a cliffhanger. What sometimes confuses our
workforces, and I have gotten emails from some employees about this, who
said if I did what Hillary Clinton did I'd be in huge trouble. My
response is you bet your ass you'd be in huge trouble. If you used a
personal email, Gmail or if you had the capabilities to set up your
own email domain, if you used an unclassified personal email system to
do our business in the course of doing our business even though you were
communicating with people with clearances and doing work you discussed
classified matters in that, in those communications, TS/SCI, special
access programs, you would be in huge trouble in the FBI..

.Of that I am highly confident. I'm also highly confident, in fact,
certain you would not be criminally prosecuted for that conduct..

.What I'm getting from the left is savage attacks for violating
policy and law by talking publicly about somebody who wasn't indicted,
by revealing facts that you should've been prescribed from revealing by
decades of tradition. All of that's nonsense just as this is nonsense.
It is a uniquely difficult time. I expect after the election, which is
coming up I'm told, we will have probably more conversations about
this..

We asked Comey in general about the SAC Conference and whether he
recalled receiving criticism about the Midyear investigation while at
the conference. Comey said he did not recall specific criticism, but
noted that "given how prevalent the criticism was, I would have expected
it to be talked about."

**II. Midyear Talking Points Distributed to FBI Field Offices (October
21)**

On October 17, Page sent an email to Baker and Anderson entitled "MYE
TPs (LCP)."^[^150^](#fn150){#fnref150 .footnote-ref}^ Strzok, the Lead
Analyst, FBI Attorney 1, and FBI Attorney 2 were cc'd on the email. The
email stated:

Last week, Jim Rybicki and Mike Kortan reached out to a couple of us to
ask that we put together some detailed MYE information related to the
topics SACs most frequently get asked about. I'm not 100% certain about
the uses these talking points will be used to, (I think the current
thinking is that they would be provided to SACs to use with formers, in
Citizen's Academies, etc.), but attached is a very quick attempt at
answering the specific questions requested by Jim and

Mike. Could you both please take a look, and edit at will? Thanks.

The Midyear talking points were ultimately distributed to FBI SACs on
October 21.

The talking points, which included a section on frequently asked
questions, were nine pages and largely tracked Comey's July 5 statement
and his July 7 testimony before Congress. At the top of the first page
of the talking points was a note to FBI executives, the first sentence
of which stated, "The purpose of these talking points is to provide FBI
executive management with a factual basis by which to inform discussions
with employees or interested parties in the community."

Comey described the talking points as "part of an effort to make sure
that the workforce, given the prominence of the issue, understood why we
had done what we did." Comey described this commitment to transparency
as part of his management philosophy. When asked if he was concerned
with essentially deputizing 56 different spokesmen for the Midyear
investigation, Comey stated, "No, in fact I think it cuts the other way.
They're all going to be talking about it anyway in lunchrooms, in town
halls and sidebars, and so it makes sense to me to equip people who are
going to be talking about it anyway with the actual facts and our actual
perspective on it."

McCabe described the talking points as part of a broad effort "to keep
the SACs particularly more well-informed about all the major issues" the
FBI was dealing with. McCabe said that the SACs were being asked about
Midyear frequently and this was an effort to "give them some information
to work off of." McCabe also noted that the SACs requested this
information from headquarters.

When asked why the FBI did not just refer the SACs or anyone else to
Comey's July 5 statement, McCabe stated that he believed the FBI did
send Comey's statement to the field, but "maybe that didn't answer the
mail."

Rybicki told us he agreed with the assessments given by Comey and McCabe
and that SACs were contacting FBI Headquarters stating "that they
weren't getting enough information from headquarters" about the Midyear
investigation. Rybicki described the Midyear talking points as an effort
by headquarters to arm SACs with information they could use to respond
to questions they received.

Priestap attributed the revival of Midyear talking points in mid-October
to the "churn" and the fact that "the issue of Midyear just didn't
go away." Strzok agreed with this assessment, stating:

Because SACs were still getting an extraordinary number of questions
because it had become a campaign issue and that was still being batted
around by the Hill and by then candidate Trump. And SACs were getting
questions. The thought was, you know, give them enough information so
they can at least accurately answer some of those questions rather than
just saying, you know, I don't know, or here is what I've read.

**III. Midyear Briefing for Retired FBI Special Agents (October 21)**

On October 7, the President of the Society of Former Special Agents of
the FBI (the "Society") sent an email to Bowdich entitled "Controversy
over the Director/Clinton Email Situation." The Society's President
stated, in part:

I continue to hear negative comments about the Bureau's handling of the
Clinton email controversy from former agents. This is after a period
where things seemed to quiet and comments mellowed. The renewed negative
comments appeared to be timed with the release of additional emails in
the Clinton situation and with the Director's recent congressional
testimony.

I would like to offer a strategy which would possibly lower the rhetoric
on this issue. My sense is there are probably 10-15 hard core issues
that are at the heart of former agents' discontent. I know what those
issues are based on the many emails and phone calls I've received.

My proposal is to have a small group of Society people meet with the
Director and discuss those issues and formulate thorough in-depth
answers, to be published in the Grapevine, or to be directly emailed to
our members..

Bowdich replied that he would be "happy to discuss this weekend."
Bowdich told us he recalled the Society wanting a sit-down with Comey,
which Bowdich considered a bad idea, and we did not find evidence that
the meeting with Comey occurred prior to the election.

However, on October 21, Strzok briefed a group of retired FBI personnel
on the Midyear investigation during a conference call. This call was
organized by Kortan, and Page also dialed into the call, although she
did not speak. Strzok told us that the call was the idea of "the seventh
floor," meaning top leadership at FBI Headquarters, and added, "Rybicki
might have been the one whose idea it was." According to Strzok:

Our Office of Public Affairs got a bunch of the former folks, like
John

Giacalone and other former EADs and Deputies and the head of the Society
of Special Agents, to essentially say, okay, please sit down with them.
And kind of walk through the investigation. And give a very fact-based
pattern of, despite the huge turn of everything you're hearing and the
allegations and people saying you gave immunity out like candy, and you
didn't even issue subpoenas. Sit down to the extent you can and walk
through, from the beginning to the end, what we did investigatively..
Sit there and say.you know, we, we did a thorough job. This is
what we did. This is what our mandate was. This is how we went about
doing it. You know, here are, there are a lot of falsehoods and
exaggerations being thrown around. This is the truth. And again, not
giving out classified information, not giving the 6(e) information out.
But to the extent that any of these folks, whether they are getting
asked by CNN, whether they're appearing in front of a congressional
committee, whether they are going to a Citizens Academy, that they have
the facts.

We asked Page about this call and she told us:

We got a ton of criticism from the formers about the, why we let her
off the hook, and why she should have been prosecuted, and why if she
had, if they had done this, they would have prosecuted, all those sort
of criticism that you have surely heard. And so Steinbach and Kortan,
Mike Kortan, came up with the idea of well why don't we put Pete on, you
know, kind of agent-to-agent to sort of, because we need to get the
formers to stop sort of criticizing the, the case. And get them to
understand actually the facts and why the facts led to not having a
prosecution.

Page described her role on the call as "trying to like give advice along
the way to sort of help them explain."

Comey told us that he is not sure he knew about Strzok's call
beforehand, but "it rings true to me." We asked him if it was normal to
have the agent who oversaw an investigation directly brief the retired
agents on that case. Comey stated, "No.there's nothing normal at all
about this, but it seemed a reasonable thing to do given the stakes
which was the credibility of the organization."

Steinbach described a separate speech he gave to the Washington, D.C.,
chapter of the Society of Former Special Agents of the FBI in October
2016. A news article from October 31, 2016, reported on Steinbach's
remarks and his comments on the Midyear investigation. Steinbach told us
that his "intention" in giving the remarks was "to kind of level set
that from one investigator to another former investigator. Say, hey
look, you know, here is why we did it."

**IV. FBI Office of Public Affairs Research Project (October 14 to 31)**

On October 14, Rybicki and Kortan assigned an FBI Office of Public
Affairs (OPA) Public Affairs Advisor a "research project." The Public
Affairs Advisor's initial email to Kortan and Rybicki on October 14
stated, "Per Mike Kortan's suggestion, I'll compile a list of
stories from the past 24 hours that I've found that revolve around the
recent email story from Fox."^[^151^](#fn151){#fnref151 .footnote-ref}^
Rybicki responded that evening, "Thanks.. This is very helpful. I
think the idea is that you would also track all email investigation
stories each day and then we can figure out which ones are so inaccurate
that we need to respond in some way." Consistent with this assignment,
from October 14 and continuing through the end of October, we identified
a series of almost daily emails from the Public Affairs Advisor to
Kortan and Rybicki highlighting critical media coverage of the Clinton
email server investigation. The emails typically included links to and
summaries of the articles cited.

We identified October 13 notes from FBI Attorney 1 entitled "MYE---Fox
article w/Rybicki + Kortan." The notes included the following entry:

● Special projects person---fact check news of the day

to SACs

and maybe bkgd to reporters? √ OPA or maybe reach out to people who
wrote article

FBI Attorney 1 told us she did not remember this meeting and "had no
idea" what the "special projects person" notation signified.

An October 22 email from the Public Affairs Advisor to Kortan and
Rybicki provided some insight into his assignment. He stated, "I've done
several searches on the topic we discussed today and yesterday, and I'm
not seeing anything falling under the themes that we discussed
(destruction of materials, dissention sic, etc.) that is creeping
into the main stream."

We asked Rybicki about the Public Affairs Advisor's assignment and
showed him examples of the emails cited above. Rybicki did not recall
giving the Public Affairs Advisor "any directive to look at specific
outlets or anything like that."

Rybicki did recall that "the Director had the Public Affairs Advisor
tracking stories

I think from back in, you know, early July, maybe even prior to that
about the

Midyear investigation." Similarly, Kortan told us, "I think the
Director or the Director's Office actually asked him during some period
of time there just to keep track of the reporting on everything to see
how it was, how things were being reported."

The Public Affairs Advisor said he recalled very little about this
research assignment "other than.if there was an article that had
come out, and they said can you see if, find the other stories that,
that were like this or had this similar narrative, and if it was being
picked up." He told us that he "can't imagine Rybicki would ask me
to track all email investigation stories. As there were a mountain, a
flood of them." When we pointed out the specific guidance about
"destruction of materials" and "dissention" in the October 22 email, the
Public Affairs Adviser said that he assumed the destruction guidance
related to an inaccurate story about the destruction of Clinton's server
and he was unsure what the "dissention" guidance meant. Kortan told us
that he thought the "dissention" reference referred to stories about
"all kind of conflict within the Midyear team about.the
conclusion of the Midyear investigation."

The Public Affairs Advisor said he was not sure why he was given this
assignment in mid-October, but recalled more coverage of the Midyear
investigation "popped up" at this time. The Public Affairs Advisor also
could not recall if he was given similar research assignments during
other time periods.

We asked Comey about the Public Affairs Advisor and the assignment.

Comey told us that he first met the Public Affairs Advisor when Comey
worked in EDVA. Comey stated that he recruited the Public Affairs
Advisor to SDNY after he became the U.S. Attorney there. The Public
Affairs Advisor then followed Comey to the Department when Comey was
appointed DAG and later to the FBI after Comey became Director. We
pointed out to Comey that almost all of the media coverage identified by
the Public Affairs Advisor in the October time period was negative
coverage of the FBI's handling of Midyear and asked if that was a
particular focus of the FBI's efforts at the time. Comey stated that
"knowing what critics are saying is very, very important." Comey added
that this sometimes permitted the FBI to push back on inaccurate
reporting.

We asked Comey more generally about the FBI's role in the run up to the
election. Specifically, we cited several of the above
examples---correcting inaccuracies in the media, issuing talking points
to SACs, briefing former agents--- and we asked Comey why the FBI was
essentially inserting itself into the back and forth dialogue of two
political campaigns. Comey replied:

It's not our role, but it's our role to be believed by the American
people. And you've heard me say this before, when we rise and say, I
found this under the car seat or I heard this statement or I seized this
document in the bureau drawer.we have to be believed. And so my worry
was, actually I had a great sense of relief after the July 5th thing,
like that's over and now what I need to worry about is making sure that
I did what I did in July as we talked about a million times because I
thought it was best calculated to preserve the institutions, now I need
to do my absolute best to make sure that the poison that follows doesn't
continue to undercut the credibility of the institution in American
life. And so I could have just pulled back, but if I pulled back without
any push back, a doubt about the FBI's political independence first
would be pushed in from the right and then it would be pushed in from
the left and then I'd be left after the election trying to un-ring a
bell and a lot of what I was trying to avoid to start with would have
crept in and then the FBI would have been, oh they're those people with
the Clintons or fix-it, we need to, so I was with the Clintons, then I
was with the Trumps, and if---and so it's not, the reason I disagree
with your characterization, it's not pushing our way into a political
campaign, all this is flowing out from the campaigns and lots of
others through the media at the FBI and its reputation with the
American people; I have to worry about that in my view.

**V. FOIA and Congressional Requests in October**

Throughout the month of October, the FBI responded to various Freedom of

Information Act (FOIA) and congressional requests for information about
the

Midyear investigation. McCabe told us, "The fact is, we were meeting
about Midyear-related things constantly, like during the October
time period. FOIA requests, Congressional requests." For example,
McCabe, Rybicki, Anderson, Strzok, Page, FBI Attorney 1, Baker, and
Priestap were invited to a meeting entitled "Mtg. w/DD RE Decision
Points" at 2:30 p.m. on September 29. Contemporaneous notes from the
meeting showed that this meeting involved a discussion of congressional
requests for materials from the Midyear investigation. In another
example, McCabe sent an email to Comey on October 17 to summarize the
events of the day. Rybicki and Bowdich were copied on the email. The
email stated, in part, "Lots of OPA action on the Midyear investigation
email front with eh sic release of the 302s. Nothing unexpected,
will likely drive some additional committee requests.."

**CHAPTER NINE: DISCOVERY OF CLINTON EMAILS ON THE WEINER LAPTOP AND
REACTIVATION OF THE MIDYEAR INVESTIGATION**

In this chapter, we discuss the discovery of Clinton emails on the
Weiner laptop and the eventual reactivation of the Midyear
investigation. Section I details the discovery of these emails by the
FBI's New York Field Office (NYO) and Section II discusses the numerous
notifications of this fact to FBI Headquarters in late

September and early October. Section III describes the initial response
by FBI Headquarters and Midyear personnel to this discovery. Section IV
discusses NYO's processing of the Weiner laptop. Section V details the
ensuing inaction by FBI Headquarters and Midyear personnel, and the
explanations we received from FBI leadership and Midyear personnel for
this inactivity. In Section VI, we discuss the Weiner case agent's
concerns about this inactivity and, in Section VII, we describe the
actions taken by the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of
New York (SDNY) as a result of these concerns. In Section VIII, we
discuss the response by the Department and FBI to SDNY's notification
about the Weiner laptop. Section IX examines the reengagement on this
issue by FBI Headquarters and Midyear personnel. Section X describes the
events that led to the decision to seek a search warrant for the Weiner
laptop. We provide our analysis in Section XI.

**I. Discovery of Emails by the FBI's New York Field Office**

**A. Seizure of Weiner Laptop and Devices**

In September 2016, the FBI and the U.S. Attorney's Office for the
Southern District of New York (SDNY) began investigating former
Congressman Anthony

Weiner for his online relationship with a minor. The FBI's New York
Field Office

(NYO) was in charge of the investigation. A federal search warrant was
obtained on September 26, 2016, for Weiner's iPhone, iPad, and laptop
computer. The FBI obtained these devices the same day. The search
warrant authorized the government to search for evidence relating to the
following crimes: transmitting obscene material to a minor, sexual
exploitation of children, and activities related to child pornography.

B. Emails and BlackBerry PIN Message Viewed by Case Agent
---------------------------------------------------------

The case agent assigned to the Weiner investigation was certified as a
Digital Extraction Technician and, as such, had the training and skills
to extract digital evidence from electronic devices. The case agent told
the OIG that he began processing Weiner's devices upon receipt on
September 26. The case agent stated that he noticed "within hours" that
there were "over 300,000 emails on the laptop."

The case agent told us that on either the evening of September 26 or the
morning of September 27, he noticed the software program on his
workstation was having trouble processing the data on the
laptop.^[^152^](#fn152){#fnref152 .footnote-ref}^ The case agent stated
that he went into the email folder on the laptop to see why the
processing was "hung up." He explained that, because the laptop was
still processing, he was only able to view the emails that were
immediately visible in the window on his computer screen. The case agent
told us that the first item he clicked on was "either an email between
Hillary and Huma Abedin or a BlackBerry PIN message." The case agent
stated that, in the window of items visible to him, he saw a "couple" of
emails between Clinton and Abedin and at least one BlackBerry PIN
message between Clinton and Abedin. The case agent told us that the
BlackBerry PIN message in particular caught his attention because his
"general understanding" was that those messages reside on a "BlackBerry
proprietary-like backbone" and would not "leave much of a trace because
it doesn't go through any external servers other than a BlackBerry
server." When asked specifically how he identified this BlackBerry PIN
message as being between Clinton and Abedin, the case agent stated that
"it was obvious" from the domains, which were "something like
HR15\@BBM-dotsomething, and HAbedin\@BBM-dot." With respect to the
emails he observed, the case agent said he recalled seeing emails
associated with "about seven domains," such as yahoo.com, state.gov,
clintonfoundation.org, clintonemail, and hillaryclinton.com.

The case agent told us that he asked another agent to take a quick look
at his computer to "make sure, am I, am I seeing what I think I'm
seeing?" The other agent told the OIG that he "vividly" recalled what he
described as the "oh-shit moment" when the case agent said that Hillary
Clinton's emails were on the laptop. The other agent stated that, while
he did not view the content, he believed that he did see the domain
portion of the emails and remembered thinking at the time that it was
the same domain that had been associated with Clinton in news coverage.
The other agent told the OIG that he and the case agent agreed that this
information needed "to get reported up the chain" immediately.

### 0.0.2. C. Reporting of Clinton-Related Emails to FBI NYO Supervisors

The case agent told us that, after speaking with the other agent, he
immediately told his Supervisory Special Agent (SSA) what he had
observed, including that he had seen "private BlackBerry messages,
private messages between Hillary and Huma to which Anthony Weiner was
not a party." The NYO SSA corroborated this account, stating that the
case agent came into his office on

September 27 and told him "he had discovered emails that could be tied
to Hillary Clinton." The SSA told us that he specifically recalled the
case agent mentioning domain names associated with Hillary Clinton, the
Clinton Foundation, and possibly Clinton for President. The SSA also
recalled the case agent telling him "early on" that there were "hundreds
of thousands" of emails. The case agent and SSA told us that because the
search warrant for the laptop was limited to child exploitation
offenses, they agreed during this meeting that the emails were not
covered under the search warrant and the case agent should not review
those emails. The SSA and the case agent met with their Assistant
Special Agent in Charge (ASAC) to make him aware of the emails. The ASAC
told us that the SSA and case agent initially briefed him on September
28. The ASAC stated they reported that the laptop was still processing,
but there were approximately 141,000 emails of interest at that moment.
The ASAC further stated that the case agent and SSA identified seven
different domains of interest. The ASAC's notes from the morning of

September 28 corroborated this account. The notes included references to
"imaging, processing ½ way through," "141k emails," and seven domains,
which were \@clinton.com/gov, \@state.gov, \@clintonemail.com, \@AW.com,
\@clintonfoundation.org, \@presidentclinton.com, and
\@hillaryclinton.com.

The ASAC told us that he immediately instructed the case agent and SSA
to stay focused on the Weiner investigation and to "stay completely out
of" the Clinton email case. The SSA and case agent stated that the ASAC
told them to stop reviewing the emails pending further guidance from FBI
Headquarters. The ASAC told us that he briefed the information that he
received from the SSA and case agent to his immediate supervisor, the
Acting SAC (A/SAC), that day. The A/SAC confirmed this account, stating
that he was "told there were emails here related to

Hillary Clinton and others."

According to both the A/SAC and NYO Assistant Director in Charge (ADIC)
William Sweeney, the A/SAC relayed this information to Sweeney on
September 28 immediately after the FBI's weekly 3:00 p.m. secure video
teleconference (SVTC) for SACs, which is a SVTC held by the Director or,
in his absence, the Deputy Director or another FBI senior executive. The
weekly SAC SVTC is followed by another SVTC for FBI Assistant Directors
(AD). Sweeney explained:

Between those two SVTCs, so there's a pause so all the other offices
bail out, and then they basically reset. Between that pause I think is
the first time I hear about Clinton domain names on this thing. And that
comes from the A/SAC.. And so he tells me about this laptop. I
don't know if he described it as a laptop, but I think he did. Hey,
and there's a whole bunch of Clinton email domain names. I don't know if
he described it as domain names, but, and I wrote them on an index
card---which I can't find for the life of me right now. But it was like
Clinton.com, state-dot---like, it was clearly it was her stuff. And that
they had about 141,000.

The A/SAC told us that he and Sweeney both had concerns about not
exceeding the scope of the Weiner search warrant. The A/SAC's notes from
that meeting stated, "400 PM---Spoke w/Sweeney. Do not do anything with
the emails illegible move forward with other agents."

**D. Reporting of Clinton-Related Emails to SDNY**

On September 27, the case agent also began advising the two SDNY
Assistant United States Attorneys (AUSA) assigned to the Weiner case
about what he was finding on the Weiner laptop. Many of the case agent's
communications with SDNY were captured in a timeline created by the two
AUSAs detailing key events in the Weiner investigation in September and
October 2016. This timeline was created in late October and AUSA 2 told
us that she and AUSA 1 created the timeline because they thought that
"at some point somebody is going to want to know sort of what was
happening when, and it's better to piece this together now." That
timeline showed, and the prosecutors confirmed during interviews, that
the case agent first told the prosecutors about the presence of Abedin's
emails on the Weiner laptop on September 27. Similar communication was
also occurring between higher levels of NYO and SDNY. On September 27 at
3:30 p.m., the A/SAC and SDNY Deputy U.S. Attorney Joon Kim spoke by
telephone. The A/SAC's notes stated, "Spoke with Joon Kim who advised we
need to be very careful looking at that server because it is apparently
a shared computer with Huma. SDNY will provide protocol and guidance."
Similarly, Kim emailed prosecutors and supervisors at SDNY after the
call, "I just got a call from the A/SAC about what to do with his
computer in light of the facts that there are lots of emails, etc.
including what appear to be Abedin's. We need to come up with a
clear protocol."

The AUSAs provided written guidance to the case agent about how to
handle review of the laptop. In a September 28 email to the case agent
and the SSA, AUSA 1 advised that the case agent should review "only
evidence of crimes related to the sexual exploitation of children,
enticement, and obscenity" and instructed the case agent "that all
emails and other communications between Anthony Weiner and Huma Abedin
(even if there are other parties to the communication) should be
sequestered and not reviewed at this time." The case agent agreed and
responded that the "only emails I will review are those to/from
Weiner accounts to which Huma Abedin is not party."

Later in the day on September 28, the AUSA-created timeline noted:

The case agent informed AUSAs that the header info previously
described seen in plain view search revealed numerous emails between
Abedin and HRC (on which Weiner was not a party) using potentially
sensitive email addresses, which indicated that Abedin had used the
laptop. The case agent said that his chain of command was aware of
the information. AUSAs informed supervisors of these facts. Later that
day, SDNY USAO and FBI NY leadership discussed situation and agreed that
Rule 41 prevented any search in this case beyond scope of warrant, and
that any emails outside that scope should be segregated and not reviewed
in this case. Same day, FBI NY ASAC  asked AUSA to forward him the
guidance for conducting the search that the AUSA had sent to the case
agent because FBI counsel was interested in issuing guidance for
review and seeing what we had already said on this point.

This timeline entry was consistent with testimony by the case agent and
AUSAs during their interviews with the OIG.

**II. Reporting of Clinton-Related Emails to FBI Headquarters**

**A. AD Secure Video Teleconference on September 28**

As noted above, ADIC Sweeney and the A/SAC both told us that, just
before the start of the weekly AD SVTC on September 28, the A/SAC
briefed Sweeney about the discovery of emails on the Weiner laptop that
were potentially relevant to the Clinton email investigation. The AD
SVTC typically includes the FBI Director, the Deputy Director (DD), the
Associate Deputy Director (ADD), the General Counsel, all Executive
Assistant Directors (EAD), all ADs, and the ADICs of the New

York, Los Angeles, and Washington Field Offices. However, on September
28, Comey testified in front of the House Judiciary Committee until
approximately 1

p.m. Comey and others told us that Comey was not present for the SVTC,
and the SVTC was also not included on his calendar for September 28.
Instead, the SVTC was chaired by then DD McCabe, which McCabe told us
would be the typical practice in the absence of the Director. McCabe's
calendar for September 28 included time for the weekly SVTC at 3 p.m.
The FBI was unable to provide the OIG with a roster of attendees for the
September 28 SVTC. However, based upon the leadership structure of the
FBI at the time, there would have been approximately 39 FBI executives
on the SVTC, including the DD, the ADD, 6 EADs, 28 ADs, and 3 ADICs. Any
executive on leave or travel would have typically been replaced by a
subordinate.

Sweeney stated that, during the September 28 AD SVTC, he reported that

NYO agents involved in the Weiner investigation had discovered 141,000
emails on Weiner's laptop that were potentially relevant to the Clinton
email investigation. Paul Abbate, then the ADIC for the Washington Field
Office, recalled Sweeney stating that NYO had discovered "a large volume
of emails that might be relevant to the Clinton email matter" on a
computer in the Weiner investigation. Abbate told us that he believed
Sweeney also provided specific numbers and added that Sweeney "very much
emphasized the significance of what he thought they had there." Abbate
described the moment as like "dropping a bomb in the middle of the
meeting" and stated that "everybody realized the significance of this,
like, potential trove of information."

Sweeney told the OIG that McCabe responded to his briefing by stating,
"Hey, I'm going to Quantico. I'll call you en route." Abbate also
recalled someone, possibly McCabe, telling Sweeney that they would "talk
offline afterwards." McCabe's Outlook calendar for September 28 showed
that he was scheduled to be at Quantico at 6:00 p.m. that evening.

McCabe told us that he did not remember Sweeney briefing the Weiner
laptop issue on a SVTC, although he said it was possible that Sweeney
had done so. McCabe explained that the reports by the ADICs on the SVTC
are usually "like 10 seconds." We showed McCabe his notes from September
28, which contained the following entry: "NY - ... Weiner -- atty took
data off cloud -- 2007 emails." McCabe told us the notes did not refresh
his recollection but agreed that they "would be a pretty good
indication" that he was made aware of the issue.

Other witnesses also provided recollections of this briefing.
Counterintelligence Division AD Priestap (one of the 39 FBI executives
who regularly participated in the weekly AD SVTC) told us he vaguely
recalled Sweeney mentioning the discovery of emails on the Weiner laptop
that were potentially relevant to the Midyear investigation in a forum
similar to the AD SVTC. The Human Resources Division AD told us that he
recalled Sweeney mentioning "emails relevant to the Clinton
investigation" that had been discovered on a laptop associated with
Anthony Weiner. He added, "I remember Bill saying like hey, we think
there's some stuff on here you guys may not have seen."

Comey, who was not present for the SVTC, stated that he was unaware that
Sweeney had reported the discovery of Clinton emails on the Weiner
laptop during the September 28 AD SVTC. When asked if this was
information he would have expected to have been told, he stated, "Yeah,
I would think so," adding that he was surprised that he had not been
informed.

**B. McCabe Post-SVTC Phone Call and Meeting on September 28**

**1. Phone Call with Sweeney**

Sweeney told us that he had not heard back from McCabe after the
September 28 SVTC, so he called McCabe on his drive home that evening.
Phone records show two calls from Sweeney to McCabe on September 28. The
first occurred at 4:51 p.m. and lasted for 9 minutes and 50 seconds, and
the second occurred at 5:03 p.m. and lasted for 56 seconds. In addition,
Sweeney's Outlook calendar for that day contained the following entry at
5:00 p.m.: "Telcal w/DD re: Weiner invest & Garner." Sweeney stated that
NYO personnel had continued processing the laptop in the time since the
initial notification on the AD SVTC and he had been informed there were
now 347,000 emails on the laptop. Sweeney told us that he informed
McCabe that there were now 347,000 emails.

McCabe, who told us that his earliest recollection of learning about the

Weiner laptop was in a telephone call with Sweeney in late September or
early

October, recalled Sweeney informing him that NYO had seized a laptop
from Anthony Weiner "and they thought there would be Clinton stuff in
it." When asked what Sweeney specifically told him, McCabe stated, "I
just remember him saying we think, you know, like, we've got this laptop
and we opened it up, and it looks like there's stuff on there from
Clinton, and, you know. Oh, my gosh, what do we do kind of thing."
McCabe also recalled that Sweeney made "very clear" that "it was a large
volume" of emails. McCabe stated that he understood "large volume" to
mean "like many thousands of emails." McCabe recalled telling Sweeney
that Counterintelligence Division personnel and NYO personnel should
connect "to figure out, like, what do we have or what do we do with
this?"

McCabe stated that shortly after this call he contacted Priestap and
said, "You need to get somebody up to New York right away to take a
look at what they have because it might be Clinton emails." Priestap
told us that he did not recall either this conversation or McCabe
telling him to send a team to New York to examine the Weiner laptop. As
described below, Priestap's emails on the evening of September 28
reflect that he spoke with Sweeney and then instructed Strzok to have
someone from his team contact NYO regarding the information.

**2. Meeting with Strzok and Priestap**

Our review of Strzok's text messages revealed that McCabe discussed the

Weiner laptop with Strzok and Priestap on September 28. Later that same
day, Strzok and Page discussed the meeting in a series of text messages.
Their exchange is quoted below. The sender of each text message is
identified after the

timestamp.

7:25 p.m., Strzok: "Got called up to Andy's earlier.hundreds of
thousands of emails turned over by Weiner's atty to sdny, includes a ton
of material from spouse. Sending team up tomorrow to review.this will
never end.."

7:27 p.m., Page: "Turned over to them why?"

7:28 p.m., Strzok: "Apparently one of his recent texting partners may
not have been 18.don't have the details yet"

7:29 p.m., Page: "Yes, reported 15 in the news."

7:31 p.m., Strzok: "And funny. Bill Priestap and I were waiting
outside his door. He was down with the director.."

7:51 p.m., Strzok: "So I kinda want to go up to NY tomorrw sic,
coordinate this, take a leisurely Acela back Friday.."

Strzok stated that he was sure that "got called up to Andy's" referred
to McCabe's office, but he had no recollection of that meeting. Strzok
could not recall who first told him about the Weiner laptop, only
recalling that someone told him that some "Clinton-type emails" had been
discovered in New York. Strzok's notes from September 28 stated, "NY
invest Weiner sexting 15 y'o. Weiner atty produces copy of everything
Weiner has on iCloud to SDNY. Significant email from Huma NFI -- their
email vs. her independent email? Relevance to MYE, Clinton Foundation?
MYE go review." Strzok stated that he initially planned to send a team
to New York to review the emails, but that a conference call with NYO
was scheduled instead. (This conference call, which occurred on
September 29, is discussed below.)

Strzok told us that he did not consider the new information all that
noteworthy because "throughout the summer we had retired Foreign
Service officers.any number of people coming and saying, hey, I've
got, you know, a handful of emails related to, you know, the Secretary
or Cheryl Mills or something. And so we would run if they, we thought
they had potential merit. We would track them down." Strzok conceded
that this lead was more credible since it came from an FBI field office
and involved information obtained from Abedin's husband. He added,
though, "There is no inkling, there is not a shadow of the, you
know, what's going to unfold a month later."

Page said she believed the September 28 text message from Strzok was the
first time she heard about the emails on the Weiner laptop and told us
that she knew little information about it. Page explained that she was
"not really that involved" in "most of the October stuff." Page stated
her lack of involvement was due in part to the FBI's Russia
investigation. Page explained that the many of the supervisors on the
Midyear team were also assigned to the Russia investigation and they
were "super-occupied" with the Russia investigation during October. Page
stated that most of her information about the Weiner laptop came from
either Strzok or FBI Attorney 1.

We showed McCabe these text messages and he said he did not recall
talking to Strzok about the Weiner laptop on September 28. McCabe also
did not recall Sweeney describing the quantity of emails numerically,
other than to say there were a "large volume." When asked about Strzok's
text message that he was "sending a team up tomorrow to review,"
McCabe noted that the text message would be consistent with what McCabe
told Priestap. McCabe told us that the issue of the Weiner laptop "kind
of falls off my radar" at this point, but when he reengaged with the
team at a later point (he could not recall the amount of time that had
elapsed), he discovered, "that the team did go up, but there was
a problem, a legal, you know, an access problem because what they want
to look for was not covered within the warrant, and yada, yada,
yada." McCabe could not recall who told him this information about the
trip to New York, but speculated it was Priestap.

**C. Comey and McCabe Communications After AD SVTC on September 28**

Phone records show two phone calls between McCabe and Comey on the
evening of September 28. The first call was from McCabe to Comey at 7:34
p.m. for 1 minute and 31 seconds. The second call was from Comey to
McCabe at 8:36

p.m. for 8 minutes and 13 seconds. McCabe told us he could not recall
the content of either phone call. When asked specifically if they
discussed the issue of the Clinton emails on the Weiner laptop, McCabe
said he did not recall and noted that he would talk with Comey at the
end of the day on an almost daily basis. Additionally, as noted above,
Strzok's text message on September 28 reflected that, while Strzok was
waiting outside McCabe's office to meet with him regarding the Weiner
laptop emails, McCabe "was down with the director." McCabe told us that
he did not recall that and noted that the text message did not "seem
consistent" with McCabe's calendar, which showed that he was at Quantico
the evening of September 28.

McCabe said he recalled talking to Comey about the Weiner laptop issue
"right around the time McCabe found out about it." McCabe described
it as a "flyby," where the Weiner laptop was "like one in a list of
things that we discussed." McCabe continued, "And it would have been
like, hey, Bill Sweeney called. This is what he has. I'm going to have
the Counterintelligence Division take a look at it. I'll let you
know." McCabe stated that he would have told Comey about the importance
of sending a team up the next day in order "to get eyes on this thing
and figure out what we have." McCabe did not recall Comey "weighing in
on it at all." Given the scrutiny of the Clinton email server
investigation, we asked McCabe why he believed Comey did not have a
stronger reaction to this information and whether this was considered a
"big deal." McCabe responded:

Well, it was a big deal to me. I can't tell you what he was thinking
when I told him about it. But I, I represented to him that we were
taking steps to figure out what we had and would come back with some
sort of an assessment as to what we need to do. So, I mean, there's, I'm
not sure that there's anything else that he would have said to do.

Comey told the OIG that he recalled first learning of the presence of
the additional emails on the Weiner laptop at some point in early
October 2016, although Comey said it was possible this could have
occurred in late September. Comey explained:

I was aware sometime in the first week or two of October that there was
a laptop that a criminal squad had seized from Anthony Weiner in New
York and someone said to me that---and I'm thinking it might have been
Andrew McCabe, but someone said to me kind of in passing, they're trying
to figure out whether it has any connection to the Midyear
investigation. And the reason that's so vague in my head is I think---I
never imagined that there might be something on a guy named Anthony
Weiner's computer that might connect to the Hillary Clinton email
investigation, so I kind of just put it out of my mind.

Comey described himself as having a "reasonably good memory" and
speculated, "The reason I didn't index it is, it was a passing thing
that almost seemed like he might be kidding, and so I don't think I
indexed it hard. And I think it was the beginning of October and then I
think it disappears from my memory. And then I remember for certain when
Andy emails me, I think it's the 27th of October saying, the Midyear
team needs to meet with you urgently or right away or something."

We asked Comey to explain why this initial information about the Weiner
laptop did not "index" with him given that Abedin was closely connected
to Clinton. Comey stated, "I don't know that I knew that Weiner was
married to Huma Abedin at the time." Comey told us that even if he had
had known that Abedin was married to Weiner "it wouldn't have been at
the top of my mind." Comey also stated that the manner in which he
was informed of this information affected his reaction. Comey told us
that he was "quite confident" that he was not told this information in a
"sit down" briefing in his office. Instead, Comey thought it most likely
that McCabe was "passing the office" and said, "hey Boss, I just want
you to know that the criminal squad in New York has got Anthony
Weiner's laptop and I think it may have some connect to Midyear."
Comey said he knew that "if it's important, Andy McCabe will make
sure that I focus on it." Comey said that it "could be" that whoever
told him about the Weiner laptop "understated the significance of the
information." He said, "The notion that I knew something important was
on that laptop and did what---concealed or hid it or something?---is
crazy."

We asked Comey if McCabe told him that Sweeney had called McCabe about
the emails on the Weiner laptop. Comey responded, "No." We also showed
Comey the Strzok text messages and asked him if he recalled being
briefed in person by McCabe on September 28. Comey said he did not
recall that occurring. Comey stated that he would have expected to be
briefed if NYO had discovered a large volume of Hillary Clinton's
emails. However, if NYO had only discovered a large volume of Abedin's
emails, he was not sure that information would be briefed to him since
there would not necessarily be a connection to Midyear. He acknowledged,
however, that it "would be significant" if the laptop contained Abedin's
emails on a clintonemail.com domain.

We asked Comey, "If McCabe had been told on September 28th that
there were...at one point 141,000 and at another 347,000 emails related
to the Clinton investigation and didn't tell you, would you be concerned
by that?" Comey responded, "Sure, I'd want to know why, what the
thinking was." Since Comey told us he did not recall being told this
information, we asked for his reaction. Comey stated:

I'm mystified. First of all doubting, worried that I'm crazy is my first
instinct, but I don't think I'm crazy. You said and I think I would
remember if I were being told, so the question is, why wouldn't you tell
me. I always try and keep an open mind and maybe some explanation and
one I can't see, but I'd want to know, why, what's the thinking. Why
didn't the, given the Director is closely associated with this, why,
what's the reasoning. Maybe there is one I can't see, but I certainly
would want to ask.

As detailed in the next section, Sweeney told us he also called EAD
Coleman, EAD Steinbach, and AD Priestap on September 28 regarding the
Weiner laptop emails. We asked Comey if any of those officials or anyone
else informed him at this time (late September) of Sweeney's report that
Midyear-related information had been discovered on the Weiner laptop.
Comey responded, "Unless I'm having a stroke, no. I don't remember any
of that." We also asked Comey if he would have expected someone on his
leadership team other than McCabe to bring this to his attention. Comey
stated that he would "not necessarily" have expected this if "they were
assuming that the Deputy Director is briefing the Director." He
described the FBI as "a big chain of command place."

**D. Sweeney Calls Other FBI Executives on September 28**

In addition to the phone call with McCabe detailed above, Sweeney told
us that on September 28 he also called Criminal EAD Randy Coleman,
National Security Branch EAD Mike Steinbach, and Counterintelligence AD
Bill Priestap with updates on the Weiner laptop. Sweeney stated that he
told all three essentially the same thing that he told McCabe, that NYO
had continued processing the laptop and the number of emails was now at
347,000.

**1. Criminal EAD Coleman**

Sweeney's phone records show several calls with EAD Coleman during the
afternoon of September 28. Coleman said Sweeney told him that NYO had
reviewed a computer belonging to Anthony Weiner and had found thousands
of "emails that pertain to Clinton...during her time as the
Secretary of State and to Huma that were connected with the Midyear
investigation." Coleman stated that he told Sweeney to make sure "to let
management and headquarters know" about this development.

Coleman drafted a "Memorandum for Record" on November 7, 2016,
documenting his involvement in the discovery of Clinton emails on the
Weiner laptop. Coleman's memorandum stated, in part:

On 09/28/2016, EAD Randall Coleman received for sic call from AD
Bill Sweeney indicating team of Agents investigating Anthony Weiner
sexting case had discovered emails relevant to Clinton email
investigation. AD Sweeney advised team had halted further review and
would be requesting guidance from FBIHQ. EAD Coleman agreed and advised
he would notify FBI General Counsel James Baker and DD Andrew McCabe.
The call was concluded. On 09/28/2016, immediately after call with AD
Sweeney, Coleman telephonically contacted DD McCabe at his office number
to advise him of the circumstance described by AD Sweeney. DD McCabe
advised he had already been made aware of matter.

Coleman told us that he called McCabe immediately because he "considered
this important." Coleman stated that McCabe's secretary answered his
call and he told the secretary to get McCabe on the phone because
Coleman "needed to talk to him." Coleman described his conversation
with McCabe as "very short." Coleman stated, "I said, hey listen, I just
got called by Sweeney. Here is what he told me. And I think Andy is
like, yeah, I already know. I got it." After his conversation with
McCabe, Coleman told us, "There was no doubt in my mind when we
finished that conversation that McCabe understood the, the gravity
of what the find was."

McCabe told us he did not recall receiving a phone call from Coleman. He
told us Coleman's memorandum did not refresh his memory, but that he had
no reason to doubt Coleman's account.

2.  **National Security EAD Steinbach**

Steinbach stated that he believed the discovery of Midyear-related
material on the Weiner laptop was first discussed at a meeting that he
was unable to attend. Steinbach recalled receiving a phone call from
Sweeney "just to give me a heads up saying, hey, you weren't here but
just FYI we may have found something." Steinbach told us this
conversation may have occurred in late September.

Steinbach said he could not recall specifics and stated that he did not
think NYO "knew exactly what they had" at the time, but added that he
received "some indication that there may be some Clinton domain emails."

2.  **Counterintelligence AD Priestap**

On September 28, at 7:04 p.m., Priestap sent an email to Strzok, with
the Lead Analyst and the NYO A/SAC copied, that stated, "I spoke to
Sweeney. Our agent and analyst should call the NYO A/SAC..
Sweeney said the A/SAC will get them access to what they need." At
9:26 p.m. on September 28, Sweeney sent the following email to Priestap,
"Bill, The NYO POC for the sensitive email issue is A/SAC  (cc'd).
He can coordinate for your team. Have a quiet night. -- Bill."

Priestap told us he could not recall if he heard about the discovery of

Midyear-related material on the Weiner laptop during the September 28 AD
SVTC. However, Priestap stated that he thought Sweeney "mentioned
something to that effect in one of those" forums. Priestap told us that
believed that he first learned of this issue in a phone call with
Sweeney. Priestap described what information he was provided, stating:

When I first was told about it, if I'm recalling correctly, it was
something to the effect of it's Anthony Weiner's laptop or computer..
His wife's emails are on it. And his wife has email communication with
the former Secretary, or probably then Secretary. And that the time
frame overlaps with some of the time frame we were interested in. In
other words, it was explained like this is in.the Midyear lane. I
don't remember getting into any volume then, although.one of my first
questions, if not the first question is, I would ask is what's the
volume.

Priestap told us that he "would have certainly talked" to his immediate
supervisor, EAD Steinbach, about this information because "the bottom
line is this was explosive." Priestap stated that he did not recall
talking to McCabe directly, although he stated that he may have if
Steinbach was out of the office that day. Priestap stated that either he
or Steinbach would have advised McCabe of "something of this magnitude"
very quickly. Priestap described the information he received from
Sweeney about the Weiner laptop as "hot information" and stated,
"It's the type of thing where I don't need an appointment. I walk
upstairs and just, I make sure they know that before they go home."

**III. Initial Response of FBI Headquarters to Discovery of
Midyear-Related Information on the Weiner Laptop**

A. Phone Call between Sweeney and Priestap on September 29
----------------------------------------------------------

On September 29 at 6:09 a.m., Sweeney sent the following email to
Priestap, "Can you give me a call on the ride in? Not clear under what
authorities we have. Thx." Sweeney told us that he conveyed to Priestap
in the phone call that NYO did not have the legal authority to look at
the Midyear-related material on the Weiner laptop. Priestap told us he
could not recall this specific conversation, but noted that it would be
standard practice to examine what legal authority was needed. At 8:12
a.m., the A/SAC forwarded to Sweeney the 7:04 p.m. email from Priestap
the night before. The A/SAC stated, "FYI There is no way that they can
just look at the emails. I even went over the guidance from SDNY. Not
happening unless they have some authority I am in the dark on. Let me
known sic if you want to discuss."

At 9:02 a.m. on September 29, Sweeney forwarded Priestap the September
28 email from SDNY AUSA 1 (detailed above) advising the Weiner case
agent on the limited scope of the Weiner search warrant and instructing
him not to review any communication to which Abedin was a party.
Priestap forwarded the email to FBI Attorney 1 and commented, "Per our
conversation." Priestap described FBI

Attorney 1 as someone he typically relies on when legal issues arise.
FBI Attorney 1 confirmed that Priestap told her about the issue with the
Weiner laptop and asked her "to follow up on it." We asked FBI Attorney
1 what she understood this to mean. FBI Attorney 1 told us that she
believed there was a question of whether the Midyear team should go to
New York and review the Weiner laptop. FBI Attorney 1 continued, "And,
you know, we had over the course of the investigation, we would have
various means of people saying, we have all of Clinton's emails. And so
this was just to follow up on that. This obviously is more, a more solid
lead than some of the other things we had, but it was just to find out
really what were the details of this. Should we send a team up there."

**B. Conference Call between NYO and Midyear Personnel on September 29**

Early on September 29, the Midyear SSA called the NYO A/SAC supervising
the Weiner investigation and, according to the A/SAC, informed the A/SAC
that he was the supervisor of the Clinton email server investigation.
The A/SAC and SSA both told us that they had a brief discussion about
what NYO had found on the Weiner laptop. The A/SAC stated, "I'm sure I
told him exactly what I'd been representing to others, that, look, there
are a lot of emails. You may want to get a search warrant. We can't,
we're not looking at anything. That's the normal stuff I would have
said." The SSA stated that the A/SAC told him, "We've got some
Clinton emails here, explained what it was. And they weren't sure what
to do with it in that it was outside the scope of what they were working
on." The SSA stated that the A/SAC explained that NYO wanted to notify
FBI Headquarters about what they had found and were also seeking
"guidance on how to deal with this."

The A/SAC and SSA scheduled a conference call, also known as a Lync
call, between NYO and Midyear personnel at 11:30 a.m. that morning. Nine
people participated in this conference call. This included the NYO
A/SAC, ASAC, and SSA supervising the Weiner investigation; a NYO SSA
assigned to public corruption matters; and five members of the FBI
Midyear team: the SSA, FBI Attorney 1, Agent 2, and two analysts. FBI
Attorney 1 told us that she participated in the call at the request of
Priestap. The Midyear SSA told us that he gave Strzok a "heads up" that
the SSA was going to have a conference call with NYO about the Weiner
laptop.

**1. Testimony and Contemporaneous Notes from Call Participants**

We interviewed all nine participants to the September 29 call and
reviewed the contemporaneous notes taken by eight of them (one
participant, the NYO SSA on the Weiner investigation, took no notes).

The NYO participants told us that they provided the Midyear team with an
overview of what they had found on the Weiner laptop. This included the
fact that the laptop contained "hundreds of thousands" of emails
potentially relevant to the Midyear investigation. Both the ASAC and
public corruption SSA recalled the number 141,000 being provided. Each
of the NYO participants said that the connection to both Hillary Clinton
and the Clinton email server investigation was made clear on the call.
The ASAC and public corruption SSA told us that NYO reported that there
were emails addresses that appeared to be "directly tied" to Abedin and
Clinton. NYO personnel stated that they informed the Midyear team that
the laptop was "still downloading." The public corruption SSA's notes
from the call also included the notation "2007 present," which he
explained was the timeline for "the span of information that they had
seen to date on the laptop." Each of the NYO participants told us that
the limited nature of Weiner search warrant was discussed. The ASAC
stated, "I know that we said to them that the warrant didn't authorize
us to look at these particular emails." He continued, "And the Midyear
personnel understood that. There was no pushback from them on that."
NYO personnel told us that they were given no tasks to complete after
the call. The ASAC explained, "I had the feeling like the ball is down
in somebody else's court.

Because.we were done."

The Midyear SSA stated that he "knew right off the bat" that NYO had
emails from Clinton's server and that they "appeared to be government in
nature." As for volume, the Midyear SSA recalled that "it wasn't a
one-off" and NYO had seen either "hundreds or thousands" of emails.
Either way, the SSA described it as a "significant number." The Midyear
SSA also told us that "content-wise" NYO "had only seen a couple" of
emails because "they couldn't review content." He said he understood
that NYO had seen more of Abedin's emails, but they had seen Clinton
emails as well, including emails from the \@clintonemail.com domain. The
Midyear SSA told us that he asked NYO personnel why they thought these
were Clinton's emails and NYO responded, "Well, because they're her
initials", indicating that they had seen something beyond the domain
name. The Midyear SSA stated that Midyear personnel were informed that
the Weiner search warrant had a very limited scope. He stated that
Midyear personnel knew that they "were going to need to get a warrant to
review this." We asked the Midyear SSA if NYO had mentioned seeing
BlackBerry domain emails on the Weiner laptop. The SSA responded,
"Yeah.. They had looked from the forensic side, that they had
determined that it appeared to be like an entire" file. The Midyear SSA
described the conclusion of the call as follows:

Well, from my standpoint, I said we were going to, we were going to
address whether we had enough for a warrant. And that we would run this
up the chain on our side. And.they agreed especially that they would
go back to SDNY and see what the exact parameters of what they could and
couldn't do, because they were not going to cross a line that would
compromise their case.

Agent 2, Analyst 1, and Analyst 2 told us that NYO reported a large
volume of emails on the laptop and noted that they were still processing
the laptop. Notes for each of these three referenced "350k items," with
Agent 2's notes also stating, "350k items in messages tab." All three
told us that NYO reported the presence of emails related to Clinton.
Analyst 1 stated that NYO reported that they had seen metadata showing
"what they were characterizing as like Hillary Clinton's email
addresses." Analyst 1 stated that the Midyear team was trying to
determine if these were Clinton's or were from the clintonemail.com
domain. Analyst 2 stated that she had only a vague recollection of the
call, but told us that she recalled that NYO had seen a large volume of
emails between Clinton and Abedin. Agent 2 stated that NYO reported
seeing emails from the clintonemail.com domain. Analyst

1's notes referenced the following domains: state.gov, clinton.com,
hillary\@clinton.com, clintonfoundation, and clintonemail.com. Analyst
2's notes included a reference to "2007 dates on PC." Each of the three
also said that NYO emphasized the limited nature of the Weiner search
warrant and the fact that the Midyear team was "going to need to get a
warrant to review this." Agent 2's notes included the following
references: "SDNY advised to avoid emails" and "not looked @ any
content." Analyst 2's notes included the following references:
"SDNY---said put them aside" and "Huma has not waived marrital sic
priv." Analyst 2 described the limited nature of the Weiner search
warrant as an "overarching theme" of the call.

FBI Attorney 1 provided a slightly different account of the call. She
stated that NYO said on the call that it was still processing the
evidence and they were not sure "whether or not it had anything to do
with" Midyear. FBI Attorney 1 explained:

We didn't know if it was the right timeframe. So, you know, Huma we
knew, Huma had.worked for Clinton for a long time. So we weren't
sure of exactly, one, what, how much of the information on this was
Huma's versus Weiner's. Because we thought it was his laptop. And then,
two, whether it would have been relevant to the right timeframe. We were
looking for Clinton's emails, not Huma's emails. We also knew Huma had a
clintonemail address, so she could have been using that for her own
personal activities, so we just didn't know the full extent of what was
on there.

When asked about volume, FBI Attorney 1 told us that she "knew that it
was a large amount of data" and FBI Attorney 1's notes from the call
referenced "over 350k items." However, FBI Attorney 1 added:

We always got things that said the data was larger than, it always ended
up getting narrowed down after we got more, got it processed more. It
doesn't change for me though, even though the 350k that's what we think.
Like, there was also all the talk about it hadn't been fully processed.
So, to me, that number was just sort of a preliminary number.

FBI Attorney 1 stated that NYO said it had seen either Clinton's emails
or emails from the clintonemail.com domain. FBI Attorney 1 told us that
NYO relayed that "SDNY was very concerned about staying within the scope
of their warrant." FBI Attorney 1 stated that the Midyear team told NYO,
"well when you get further clarity about what this laptop is, get back
to us and let us know, and we'll try to figure out what to do from
there." She told us that Midyear personnel specifically requested that
NYO look for emails related to the clintonemail.com domain. When asked
whether NYO was supposed to create an inventory or list for Midyear, FBI
Attorney 1 stated that she "thought we talked about the Weiner case
agent not being able to do that. Because of the instructions. I mean,
because of how the warrant was drafted." FBI Attorney 1's notes were
entitled "*NYO Lync -- MYE* *Emails*" and included references to "image
-- not complete b/c so large," "SDNY told them to avoid emails," "over
350k items -- including emails + IMs different addresses including
state.gov Clinton.com," "not sure if they saw

clintonemail.com," "WFO interest - \@clintonemail.com \@state.gov," and
"20092013 time frame / early next week."

2.  **Post-Call NYO Communications**

Shortly after the call concluded, at 11:52 a.m., the NYO ASAC forwarded
to the Midyear SSA and FBI Attorney 1 the September 28 email from AUSA 1
to the Weiner case agent (detailed above) outlining the limited scope of
the Weiner search warrant and providing instructions for the case
agent's search of the laptop. The ASAC told us that he forwarded this
email to make sure "they understood the directives that we had from
SDNY in terms of limitations and really kind of under what
circumstances we would be able to look at anything that was attached to
an email." Witnesses in NYO and SDNY told us that the case agent was
told not to affirmatively search the emails for information unrelated to
the Weiner child exploitation investigation. At 12:42 p.m. on September
29, the A/SAC informed Sweeney by email: "Just had the lync call with
HQ/WFO. They were misinformed about the accessibility. All good for now.
We can discuss further if you like."

The NYO A/SAC and ASAC told us they did not recall any tasking of NYO
related to the material on the Weiner laptop that was potentially
relevant to the Midyear investigation. The A/SAC told us, "I fully
expected the Midyear team to reach back out to ask me for certain
things, and, and for assistance of some sort. I know that's what I'd
do." The NYO A/SAC, ASAC, and SSA told us they had no further contact
with FBI Headquarters about the Clinton email issue until late October.
The SSA told us that he felt like NYO had done its job reporting the
information to FBI Headquarters and he "assumed they were doing
something."

2.  **Post-Call Midyear Team and FBI Headquarters Response**

We asked members of the Midyear team what steps were taken immediately
after the September 29 call. FBI Attorney 1 recalled discussing the
September 29 call with both Strzok and Deputy General Counsel Trisha
Anderson. FBI Attorney 1 stated that it was clear the Midyear team would
need "additional process or consent" to be able to do anything with the
laptop. Despite this, FBI Attorney 1 stated that she did not reach out
to the AUSAs at SDNY at this time. FBI Attorney 1 explained, "After
the SVTC, I thought, well I'm not sure we're that far along, and I think
I get what, where New York is. And so I didn't feel the need to reach
out to SDNY at that time." We asked FBI Attorney 1 whether NYO was
supposed to follow up with the Midyear team or the Midyear team was
supposed to follow up with NYO after the call. FBI Attorney 1 stated, "I
don't have an answer to that. I don't think it was very clear. I would
have expected New York to follow up because they were the one that had
to process the computer.." We asked FBI Attorney 1 what she expected
NYO to do as a result the call. FBI Attorney 1 stated:

I would have expected that the computer would have been processed, New
York would have been continuing their investigation, and to the extent
that they saw more things that could have helped us---that would have
been relevant to our case---they would have reached back out and told us
like they did on October 26th or whatever that date was, on that
Wednesday.. It just took three weeks to do that.

Strzok told us that either the Midyear SSA or FBI Attorney 1 briefed him
on the call. In a 12:26 p.m. email to Strzok on September 29, the
Midyear SSA stated, "No travel planned for tomorrow. FBI Attorney 1
will brief you at 1 pm." FBI Attorney 1 told us she recalled this
discussion with Strzok. She stated:

.Bill Priestap was wondering if we were going to send a team to
New York, to go with them and review this material with them. And based
on the call, I didn't think it was the right time yet. Obviously that's
not my decision as counsel, but I did explain to Pete, like, we didn't
know the volume. We didn't know if it was related to our material. The
search warrant was about Weiner's activities, so there would be limited
utility in sending a team to New York at this point.

Strzok's notes from September 29 stated, "NY: SW -- Saw some

\@clintonemail.com, \@state.gov." Strzok did not recall being briefed in
any detail, but stated that he was told about the limited scope of the
Weiner search warrant. Strzok told us his takeaway was:

That there is material there.. The upshot of what I recall
is, you know, we need to, we need to kind of go down this route. It
isn't a crank lead. It is something that we need to look into. There is
work they've got to do. We're not there yet, but it isn't something we
can just say, ah, let, there's nothing relevant there.

Strzok said the next step was for NYO to process the laptop and for NYO
to look for the type of data on the laptop that the Midyear team would
need. Strzok continued:

And.when you're done with that, you know, call us back and let us
know. And again.there is no sense of this is going to be huge and
horrible and the election is a month away, and God, are we going to say
something, do we need to say something to Congress? This is just, oh,
good lead and, you know, we'll get to the end of the year, next year.
We'll get to it as they process through it.

Anderson told us she vaguely recalled a "preliminary conversation" with
FBI Attorney 1 on this issue. At 10:27 a.m. on September 29, FBI
Attorney 1 sent a message to Anderson on the FBI's Lync system that
stated, "Sorry I missed the 10:15. I was meeting with Priestap about
a new development in MYE. I believe he also reached out to you, but you
were in a meeting. I can bring you up to speed when you have a minute."
Anderson said she recalled a "very skeletal" overview of the facts,
including that some Abedin materials may have been found on a laptop
obtained in an investigation of Weiner. Anderson said that she was
informed that it was unclear what was on the laptop at this point and
NYO was going "to try to figure out as much as they could" consistent
with the terms of their search warrant. When asked if FBI Attorney 1
would have been responsible for following up with NYO after the call,
Anderson stated, "It wouldn't have been FBI Attorney 1's job to
call New York and say, hey, where are you guys on this? You know, as a
lawyer, that's not what she would have been doing." Anderson said she
thought it would have been the job of "the Midyear investigative team"
to reach out to NYO to find out "where things stood." Anderson did not
recall hearing about the Weiner laptop issue again until approximately
October 27.

Priestap's notes from September 29 contained the following entry:
"*Baker* Voluntarily provided emails from 2007 on (347,000 emails) --
state.gov, - foundation.gov." Priestap explained that the "Baker"
notation meant that either Priestap received this information from FBI
GC Baker or Priestap felt that he needed to tell Baker this information.
As noted below, Baker recalled first learning about the Weiner laptop
issue from EAD Coleman on October 3. Priestap provided the following
interpretation of his notes, "My guess, I'm not positive, is that
this was an indication, you know, we thought the time frame was roughly
2007 on, there were roughly this many emails 347,000, and that it
included both" State Department and Clinton Foundation business.
Priestap told us that he met with the Lead Analyst, Strzok, and FBI
Attorney 1 on a nearly daily basis during this period and the
information in his notes may have been provided by one of those
individuals.

McCabe told us he could not recall if he learned about the September 29
call before or after it occurred.^[^153^](#fn153){#fnref153
.footnote-ref}^ He stated that the call was the Midyear team's way "of
following through with my direction to them to kind of get their hands
around this thing and let us know what do we have." We asked McCabe if
anyone informed him of the limited scope of the Weiner search warrant at
this time and he stated that he did not recall being told that until
later. McCabe stated if he had been told about the limited scope of
NYO's search warrant on September 29, "I would have said well what do we
have to do to get another warrant if that's the route we need to take."

**C. McCabe Call to NSD Leadership on October 3**

NSD Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General (DAAG) Mary McCord told
us that on or about October 3, she received a phone call from McCabe.
McCord stated that this was the first time she learned that there was a
potential issue relating to emails in an iCloud account used by Abedin
and Weiner. We found no evidence of any other contact between the FBI
Midyear team and the Midyear prosecutors regarding any material obtained
from Weiner until October 21, as discussed below.

McCord described their conversation as follows:

What he says to me is that there's this criminal case. New York is
investigating Anthony Weiner. And his counsel.provided a copy of the
content of his iCloud account. It includes a substantial number of
emails from his wife's email account. And Andy McCabe said he was
sending a Midyear agent up to look at what it is. You know, hopefully
it's all duplicates and we don't have to, you know, worry about, about
it. And at the time, he was, he was saying to me you may want to touch
base with SDNY U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara to make sure he's not
like charging ahead like doing some sort of process, like, that would
bump up against the work of Midyear.

According to McCord, she and McCabe thought that these emails were
likely duplicates given the "thorough scrub of everything" during
Midyear. McCord told us that she did not think this was "a major thing,"
but agreed that they should "make sure that there's nothing new there."

McCord's notes from the call stated, "Andy McCabe. NY CRM investigating
Anthony Weiner, his counsel provided copy of content of his i-cloud
account -- includes substantial \# of emails from wife's email account.
Andy sending mid-year agent up to look at what it is. Hopefully all
duplicates. May want to touch base w/Preet to make sure doesn't charge
ahead. Consent?" McCord stated that the "Consent?" entry was a thought
about whether consent would have been "good enough" to allow a forensic
review to determine if these were duplicate emails. After the
conversation, McCord stated, "And then, honestly, I get busy with
things. I don't really think much about this again until, and I did not
call Preet. I just decided it wasn't" warranted at that time. McCord
stated that she did not hear about the issue again until McCabe called a
second time later in October. As we discuss below, we believe this call
occurred on October 25.

McCabe only vaguely recalled a conversation with McCord. He told us that
he believed that he contacted McCord, but he thought that the
conversation occurred later in October.

NSD DAAG Toscas recalled being informed of McCabe's call to NSD in early

October and stated that he thought it related to emails in an iCloud
account used by Weiner and Abedin. Toscas did not remember the exact
timing of the call and thought that McCabe called NSD AAG John Carlin
instead of McCord. Nevertheless, the information provided by Toscas was
similar to McCord's testimony. Toscas stated that he did not hear about
this issue again until he received a phone call from SDNY Deputy U.S.
Attorney Kim on October 21. We discuss that call below.

We also asked NSD AAG Carlin about an early October call between either
McCabe and himself or McCabe and McCord related to the Weiner
investigation. Carlin, who had announced on September 27, 2016, that he
would resign as AAG effective October 15, 2016, told us he did not
recall a conversation between McCabe and himself or McCabe and McCord.

**D. FBI Headquarters Discussions on October 3 and 4**

**1. EAD Coleman October 3 Meeting with Baker and Bowdich**

As noted previously, Coleman drafted a "Memorandum for Record" on

November 7, 2016, documenting his involvement in the discovery of emails
on the Weiner laptop that were potentially relevant to the Midyear
investigation. The memorandum contained an entry for October 3 that
stated, "On or about 10/03/2016, EAD Coleman verbally advised OGC Baker
and Associate Deputy Director David Bowdich of the matter described by
AD Sweeney in a 'sidebar' meeting after normal DD Deputy Director
daily update meeting. OGC Baker advised he was not aware of the matter
and would need to look into it further." Coleman told us that he
believed McCabe was out of the office on October 3 and ADD Bowdich was
leading the daily update meeting. McCabe was scheduled to travel to New
York on October 3 to attend a symposium the following
day.^[^154^](#fn154){#fnref154 .footnote-ref}^ Coleman told us that
after a meeting on October 3, he informed Bowdich and Baker about the
information he had received from Sweeney concerning the laptop. Bowdich
told us that he did not "specifically remember" this discussion with
Coleman, but had no reason to doubt the memorandum's accuracy.

We showed Baker the Coleman memorandum and Baker stated that Coleman's
account "sounds about right." We asked Baker what he was told about the
Weiner laptop. Baker stated:

Pretty basic, but along the lines of we have this laptop in this other,
unrelated case. And somehow they figured out that there were some
additional emails on there that were outside the scope of the warrant,
if I recall correctly, that they were working on, and that they needed
to do more work to get access to them, and they would be.working on
it to try to get access to it.

Coleman's memorandum stated that Baker planned to look into the issue
further. We asked Baker about that and he stated he did not recall
specifics, but he believed he asked "somebody on the Midyear team" about
the issue.

In the Coleman memorandum's next and final paragraph, which is undated,
it stated, "It was determined by DD McCabe and EAD Steinbach that any
follow on investigative activity concerning the emails located on
Anthony Weiner's laptop would be reviewed by the MIDYEAR investigative
team." Coleman said he did not recall why this entry was undated and was
unsure at what point this occurred. He told us that he shared an office
with Steinbach and that this could have been a dialogue between himself
and Steinbach at some point later in October.

**2. Email from Bowdich to Comey on October 3**

On October 3, at 7:42 p.m., Bowdich sent an email to Comey and McCabe
briefing them on items of interest from that day. Rybicki was cc'd on
the email, which was entitled "Daily Report." After highlighting three
unrelated items, Bowdich stated, "I asked Randy Coleman to stay behind
tomorrow to quickly brief you on the Weiner matter which is growing more
complicated, but it can wait until then." Bowdich told the OIG that he
did not remember what was "growing more complicated" with the Weiner
matter. Bowdich noted that when dealing with issues of this type he
typically "would have pushed that up to Andy, and/or the Director, and
Baker would have been right in the middle of it."

Comey told us he did not recall this email and also did not recall what
was "growing more complicated" in the Weiner matter. Comey stated that
he was "only dimly" aware of the Weiner child exploitation investigation
at this point in time.

We also asked Rybicki about this email. Rybicki stated that he did not
know what was meant by "the Weiner matter which is growing more
complicated." Rybicki told us that he first recalled hearing about the
issue of Clinton emails on the

Weiner laptop on October "26th into the 27th." When asked if this email
made Rybicki think that he and Comey were aware of the Weiner laptop
issue earlier than he recalled, Rybicki responded, "I don't think
so.. I remember on the 27th right when I heard about it thinking this
is unintelligible. That would, that's my first recollection as well
of hearing anything about it."

**3. Meeting between Comey and Coleman on October 4**

Comey's Outlook calendar for October 4 contains an entry for "Morning

Briefs" from 8:15 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. that is immediately followed by an
entry for "Meeting w/EAD Coleman" from 9:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. Coleman
told us that he could not recall this briefing with Comey. Coleman
stated that staying behind to brief Comey would be consistent with
normal practice, but added that he did not recall this specific
instance. Coleman told us that it would be unusual to have a one-on-one
meeting with Comey and told us someone else would typically be present
at these briefings, such as the DD or ADD. While not remembering this
meeting, Coleman speculated that this may have been a one-on-one meeting
with

Comey to discuss Coleman's upcoming retirement from the FBI in December
2016.

Coleman told us that he kept regularly took notes in a journal.
Coleman's notes from October 4 contained the following entry:

1.  Anthony Wiener sic
2.  Unrelated
3.  Wiener sic -- texting 15 yo -- Sexually Explicit 9/26 -- Federal
    SW -- IPhone/IPAD/Laptop

Initial analysis of laptop -- thousands emails

Hillary Clinton & Foundation

Crime Against Children

We asked Coleman about these notes and he told us that, given their
placement in his notebook, the notes would most likely represent
information he was briefed on first thing in the morning by his
subordinates in the Criminal Investigative Division. Coleman stated that
he may have passed this information to other FBI executives after the
morning briefing with the Director, but he could not remember if that
occurred here.

Comey told us that he did not recall the briefing by Coleman reflected
in his calendar. We asked Comey if this briefing could have been the
time in early October that he recalled being told about the connection
between Midyear and the Weiner investigation. Comey stated:

It's possible, possible this is what is knocking around in the back of
my head, but I really, see I know the frailty of memory from having done
a lot of this work, at least in my memory it's much more of an informal
than a meeting about it, but it's possible.

We showed Coleman's notes from October 4 to Comey. Comey did not recall
being briefed on the information contained in the notes. When asked
about Coleman, Comey said he "thought very highly of him" and described
him as a "straight shooter."

We asked Comey if this information was something that he likely would
have

"put out of his mind" after being informed of it in early October. Comey
responded, "I don't think so unless, unless the way it was passed to me
was with some, you don't need to do anything. We're doing, we're running
it down or something.

Something that pushed it down on my priority list."

When asked if he recalled this meeting between Coleman and Comey,
Rybicki stated that he did not. Bowdich told us that it is possible that
he would have been at this meeting between Comey and Coleman, but he had
no recollection of it.

McCabe continued to be on travel and was not in Washington, D.C., on
October 4.

IV. **NYO Completes Processing of Weiner Laptop Around October 4**

As noted previously, the Weiner case agent told us that he noticed on
September 26 or 27 that the software program that he was using on the
Weiner laptop was having trouble processing the data on it. The case
agent told us that he reached out to a CART examiner for assistance and
the CART examiner decided to process the laptop on the CART examiner's
workstation. CART logs show that the CART examiner received the laptop
on September 29 and imaged, or made an exact copy of, the laptop the
same day. The CART examiner told us that he began using FBI software
programs to analyze and categorize the contents of the laptop the next
day and that was completed by around October 4. In total, there were
approximately 675,000 emails on the laptop.

The CART examiner told us once the processing was completed he conducted
a spot check of the results to ensure everything had processed
completely. The CART examiner stated that the first file he clicked on
was an image of a document marked "Sensitive But Unclassified" with the
initials "HRC" written on it in a blue felt-tipped marker. The CART
examiner stated that he immediately ceased his examination and reported
this to the case agent and the CART supervisor. The case agent recalled
the CART examiner showing him this document and told us that he
commented, "We can't be looking at this."

IV. **FBI Headquarters Inaction and Explanations for the Delay**

After October 4, we found no evidence that anyone associated with the
Midyear investigation, including the entire leadership team at FBI
Headquarters, took any action on the Weiner laptop issue until the week
of October 24, and then did so only after SDNY raised concerns about the
lack of action. In this section, we detail the explanations given to us
by FBI Headquarters and Midyear personnel about the reasons for this
inaction.

When we asked McCabe about this period from late September until late
October and the lack of activity on the Weiner laptop, he stated:

During that period in between, you know, I expected that we were making
progress on it. I probably met with some combination of the Midyear team
every day of that month. Near to every single day on a whole kind of
range of Midyear-related issues. And I would have expected that if they
were having problems with that issue and not making progress on
something that I had put on, on their radar as an important thing, that
that would have come to my attention. And it didn't. So I don't, I can't
sit here and tell you with perfect clarity why it didn't, whether they
thought they had it under control but they didn't, or it was being
ignored and not given the attention it, it needed, but it, it didn't
come to me during that time.

McCabe stated that he was "absolutely" disappointed that the team had
not found out more information about what was on the Weiner laptop
during this period.

McCabe added, "So to find out that we didn't know the answers to any of
those questions at the end of October was very concerning to me."

FBI Headquarters and Midyear personnel provided multiple explanations
for the apparent inactivity on the Weiner laptop during this period.
Explanations included claims of delay by NYO in processing the Weiner
laptop, a lack of specific information about what had been discovered on
the laptop, a focus on the Russia investigation, the fact that the
Weiner laptop was not considered a priority during this period, and
legal impediments to reviewing the materials on the laptop. We discuss
each of these explanations below, recognizing that these explanations
are interrelated and not mutually exclusive.

**A. Delays in Processing the Weiner Laptop**

Numerous witnesses cited delays in processing the Weiner laptop by NYO
personnel as a primary reason for the apparent inaction by FBI
Headquarters and Midyear personnel. Strzok told us that, after the
September 29 call, he understood that NYO was going to continue
processing the laptop and then when they were "done with that, you know,
call us back and let us know." FBI Attorney 1 also stated that the
Midyear team was waiting on NYO to finish processing the laptop. When
asked why it would take so long, FBI Attorney 1 stated that this "is not
that long of a period of time for the Bureau to take to get something
done." Rybicki told us that he learned after the fact that NYO had
"technical issues" with the laptop, but he did not know "why it took a
month." Comey recalled being told after the fact of a "technical delay"
or "something about a glitch with getting a mirror image of the Weiner
laptop," which ultimately "had to be sent to the Operational

Technology Division."

Page stated that NYO was "having trouble" processing the Weiner laptop
and

"that gap represents the time that New York is getting a workable image
of the Weiner laptop because it is so large." She noted that there was
"no particular urgency" on this issue, however. Page explained, "Not
to say it's not an important case, but it's not, there's no specific
reason why like all hands on deck need to be helping New York CART sort
of get this thing loaded or whatever else." Later in the interview, Page
again reiterated that NYO did not really know what they had "until they
finally sort of have it up and imaged, and start doing their.forensic
review." She continued:

And the reality is, emails had been found lots of other places that
ultimately weren't worth pursuing lots of other times. And so, until we
understand that, that the volume of emails is not simply the volume with
respect to Weiner, but that it represents Huma emails as well, you know,
my understanding is, like, it's just not super-significant yet.

**B. Prioritization of Weiner Laptop and Russia Investigation**

Priestap told us that the Weiner laptop was not his top priority at this
time due to his involvement in the Russia investigation. Priestap
explained:

If you're wondering, you know, hey, this is a really big deal, and
why aren't you asking about it every, every minute of every day type
thing, whatever, it was the, we went from this thing to the Russia
thing. And the Russia thing took them as much as my time as this thing
before. And I don't want to say distracted, but yeah. My focus wasn't on
Midyear anymore, even with this new, yes, we've got to review it. Yes,
it may contain evidence we didn't know, but I'd be shocked if it's
evidence that's going to change the outcome of the case because,
again...aside from this, did we see enough information previously in
which I felt confident that we had gotten to the bottom of the, of the
issue? I did. And so, again, I would have been shocked if it was
information that, and so the bottom line is, as important as this was,
it was, some ways it was water under the bridge. The issue of the day
was what's, what's going to be done to possibly interfere with the
election.

In written comments provided to the OIG after reviewing the draft
report, Priestap further explained:

With respect to the criticism that the FBI should have placed a higher
priority on obtaining legal authority to access and review the
potentially relevant emails on the Weiner laptop, I maintain that we
made the correct judgments. In this regard, our work on Midyear was
extensive and included the review of tens of thousands of emails, (over
7 million email fragments), and interviews of more than 70 individuals.
We amassed and analyzed an enormous volume of information, reaching the
recommendation in July 2016 that no prosecution be initiated. I
sincerely doubted that the emails identified on the Weiner laptop
were likely to alter our informed view of the matter, and therefore did
not prioritize the follow-on work over higher priority matters.

Regarding these higher priority matters, Priestap stated that in late
September 2016 Comey had tasked the Counterintelligence Division with a
multifaceted effort to protect the 2016 election from foreign
interference. This tasking included the implementation of "a national
supply chain risk management effort to identify vulnerabilities in
voting infrastructure," engaging state election officials about
potential threats, the investigation of "whether foreign adversaries
were attempting to interfere with or improperly influence the" 2016
election, and the investigation of certain U.S. persons' contacts with
foreign adversaries. Priestap told the OIG that, as the AD of the
Counterintelligence Division, he was in charge of all of these efforts.
Priestap stated:

In sum, I do not believe that the Bureau made a conscious decision to
specifically assign a lower priority to the review of the Weiner
laptop, but rather---given the other extremely significant matters being
handled by the Counterintelligence Division and the time typically
associated with obtaining legal authority and processing data---it was
not viewed as a mission critical activity. My team was prepared to
pursue this matter in the normal course, recognizing that it might not
be completed until after the presidential
election.^[^155^](#fn155){#fnref155 .footnote-ref}^

Strzok echoed this notion that the Weiner laptop was not initially his
highest priority. He stated:

This is just, you know a lead that likely is going to result in some
investigation, maybe some data we're going to have to review, you know,
January, February 2017, whenever it gets done. In my experience, it is
not unusual at all for processing to crap out and have to get restarted,
or to have problems with certain types of media.. This isn't a, a
ticking terrorist bomb. This is a, you know, again, despite the
high-profile nature of the client, a, and a very serious case, something
where it goes in the queue and gets prioritized and they're going
through it. So, if you were to ask me, you know, were there alarm bells
going off in my head on October 15th that we haven't heard back? No,
absolutely not. I didn't expect, it would not have surprised me to have
heard back in early-November or to have heard back in early-December.

Strzok explained that he had no crystal ball that could have foreseen
the events that ultimately occurred in late October and he thought it "a
misplaced assumption and belief that there should have been some sense
of urgency after September 29th, and we should have reprioritized
everything we were doing to go after this. We did not know what was
there." Strzok also cited his assignment to the Russia investigation as
an explanation for why the Weiner laptop was not seen as his top
priority. He stated:

We were consumed by these ever-increasing allegations of Russian
contacts and coordination and trying to get operations up, and following
people.. Doing a lot of stuff that was extraordinarily consuming and
concerning. So this pops up, and it's like.another thing to worry
about. And it's important, and we need to do it. Okay, get it handled.
Come back to us, and then back to this, you know, is the government of
Russia trying to get somebody elected here in the United States?"

Likewise, Page stated that she and other members of the Midyear team
were "super-focused" on the Russia investigation at this point.

We also asked Comey whether the fact that key members of the Midyear
team, including Strzok, were also assigned to the Russia investigation
contributed to the delay in reviewing the Weiner laptop. Comey told us
that he remembered being told that the team assigned to the Russia
investigation was "overwhelmed." Comey continued:

It was Russia, Russia, Russia all the time.. Well not just Russia,
Russia, Russia. It was also Midyear Congress, Midyear Congress --
because they had, somebody had to review the documents that were going
up to Congress and there was a constant demand for documents and
briefings on Midyear and Russia at the same time.

We asked Comey if, in retrospect, the team should have been bigger.
Comey responded, "Yeah maybe, yeah.. I think that's a reasonable
question to ask and I'm sure in hindsight I needed another Strzok and
maybe I needed two teams, and you always have in the Bureau, the
challenge is the talent is not necessarily that deep when it comes to
counterintelligence matters, people who can work this stuff."

**C. Lack of Specific Information**

We were also told that FBI Headquarters and Midyear personnel were
waiting on NYO to provide more specific information about what was on
the Weiner laptop. FBI Attorney 1 explained:

And you also have to remember too, like, throughout this whole
investigation, we would randomly occasionally get someone that said, oh,
I know where all the emails are. So.this was more certain than that.
But it wasn't, it wasn't like, oh, I think we have the smoking gun on
this laptop. We better hurry up and make sure we get it processed. It
was like let's see what the process turns out to be. There may not be
that much, you know, it may just be duplicative of what we already have.

When asked if she was receiving updates during this period, FBI Attorney
1 stated that she was not and did not know if anyone else was getting
updates either. FBI Attorney 1's supervisor, Anderson, also told us that
her understanding was that NYO was processing the materials and trying
to figure out what they had during this time period.

Strzok discussed this issue of a lack of information as well, stating
that only when NYO reported "the scope and content" of what was on the
laptop did it become a significant development. Specifically, Strzok
cited the facts that the Weiner laptop contained "a variety of backups
from Huma's devices," it contained information she forwarded to Weiner,
and, most importantly, had BlackBerry backups from "the missing three
months."^[^156^](#fn156){#fnref156 .footnote-ref}^

The Midyear SSA told us that he believed NYO was able to provide more
information on the volume of emails on the laptop later in October. When
asked if there was any additional information provided beyond volume,
the Midyear SSA stated that there may have been "something more specific
too" that he could not recall at the time of our interview. The Midyear
SSA told us:

I remember walking away the first time thinking that.we probably had
enough probable cause to get a search warrant to review the emails.
But I understood why that discussion wanted to be made, is that, you
know, well let's see what happens.. That lag in time was as a
result of allowing the Weiner investigation to proceed. And then
they contacted us when they felt that they had a lot more information
that needed to be addressed by, by our team. And then we proceeded with
moving forward.

The Midyear SSA stated that he did not seek an update from NYO in this
period because it was "an FBI OGC and SDNY type thing."

**D. Questions About Legal Authority**

Another reason cited by McCabe, Baker, and Priestap for the inactivity
during this period was the need to resolve questions about the legal
authority. Priestap explained:

What is our legal basis by which we can conduct the review? And
again.it's not the first time, and.I run into this all the, all
the time with trying to cross the T's, dot the I's on the legal end
before we take activity. Now, again, why it took so long, should it have
took so long? I don't know. But I saw it as a, let's, we don't have, I
don't have knowledge that we have the legal authority to say go.

Baker stated that he thought the Midyear team was "struggling with
trying to figure out" a way to access the material on the Weiner laptop
since "it was beyond the scope of the original search warrant." Baker
told us he thought that the FBI and SDNY "were continuing to work on"
overcoming these "legal complications."

FBI Attorney 1 did not share this view. She told us that "it had already
been concluded" on the September 29 call that the Midyear team would not
be able to use the Weiner search warrant to review the laptop and,
instead, the Midyear team "would need additional process or consent if
we needed to do anything." The Midyear SSA agreed with this assessment,
stating that there was a "consensus" on the September 29 call that the
only way they would be able to review the Clinton emails on the Weiner
laptop was with a new warrant.

**E. Strzok Timeline**

We asked Strzok about a document he subsequently created entitled
"Weiner timeline" and included in an email he sent to Page on November
3, 2016. The document contained the following entries for the period
from September 26 through October 21:

09/26/2016 -- NYO obtains search warrant for Weiner laptop

09/28/2016 -- ADIC NY notes potential MYE-related material following
weekly SAC SVTC

09/29/2016 -- Conference call between NYO and MYE team

- NYO notes processing is crashing system and not complete, but during
    troubleshooting observes material potentially related to MYE
    (clintonemail.com and state.gov domains) seen during course of
    review
- No numbers/volume available
- Discussion about ability to search for material determines such
    activity would be outside scope of warrant
- Request to NYO to gather basic facts (numbers, domains, etc) based
    on their review Approx. 10/19/2016 -- NYO completes carving
- NYO observes Sensitive But Unclassified attachment

10/21/2016 -- 6:00 PM DOJ/NSD advised MYE leadership that SDNY

informed them of MYE-related media on Weiner media

We asked Strzok why he created this timeline on November 3, which was
days after Comey sent his letter to Congress informing it that the FBI
had discovered additional emails. Strzok stated:

Because I think the, the question was, okay, here we are. We're having
to reopen and it's right in the middle of, you know, the last week of
the election. You know, potentially we would need to do this. And that
people are going to come afterwards and say either you delayed to help
Hillary, you delayed to help Trump, whatever it was. Let's, while it is
fresh or as fresh as possible, let's kind of document out. And I, you
know, again, I don't know if the political hue and cry had already begun
of, you know, conspiracy. But I think the sense was, okay, let's kind of
write down and while it's still sort of fresh, yeah.

Strzok told us he could not remember if he was directed to put together
the timeline. He stated that he sent the timeline to Page for "her and
Baker" and FBI executive leadership "consumption."

As for the contents of the timeline, we asked Strzok about the September
29 entry of "no numbers/volume available" and how that squared with
his September 28 text message to Page that stated there were "hundreds
of thousands of emails" on the laptop. Strzok replied:

Because this is specific to the Huma Midyear stuff. I think when they
gave that volume, and I don't know what, again, I wasn't there, my read
of that text is that New York said they had in total hundreds of
thousands of emails, Anthony's, Huma's, who-knows-who. But that the sum
total were hundreds of thousands. And within that, there was more than
the de minimis amount of Huma stuff. And that is a result of the
conference call, they were able to say we don't know how many we have.

We also asked Strzok about the October 19 entry and why he wrote that it
was approximately October 19 when NYO had completed "carving" the
laptop.^[^157^](#fn157){#fnref157 .footnote-ref}^ As noted in Section
9.IV above, processing of the Weiner laptop was, in fact, completed by
NYO around October 4 and the Sensitive But Unclassified attachment was
observed by NYO around the same time. Strzok stated, "It was roughly
that time table. And I don't know how I arrived at the 19th, if there
was a notation that clearly indicated that on or prior to that date,
something had come in."

We asked Strzok to respond to the accusation that this inaction on the
Weiner laptop was a politically motivated attempt to bury information
that could negatively impact the chances of Hillary Clinton in the
election. Strzok responded:

No, I'd say quite the opposite.. I think every act was taken with an
objective reason to say, okay, here is why we did it, and why it was
prioritized the way it was.. The Midyear SSA and FBI Attorney
1 were the ones engaging with New York. You had agents and AUSAs up in
New York who were involved in pursuing it, that ultimately, you know, we
sat there, and we decided when we found out what was there that we
needed to get the case and reopen the case. And if you want to pitch in
the conspiracy perspective, everything we pushed to do, the Clinton side
is going to say, what you did absolutely killed my chances at the
election. So, you know, pick it. Which is your conspiracy?. It
angers me because there is not, if there were bias, and there is not
bias, if there were bias.it didn't result in actions which would be
indicative of bias.

**VI. Concerns of Weiner Case Agent and Conversation with SDNY AUSAs on
October 19**

As early as October 3, the case agent assigned to the Weiner
investigation expressed concern that no action appeared to be occurring
with regard to the Clinton emails discovered on the Weiner laptop. He
began documenting these concerns in contemporaneous emails and also
discussed his concerns with his supervisor and the SDNY AUSAs assigned
to the Weiner investigation. In an October 3 email, the case agent
stated that a "significant number" of the emails on the Weiner laptop
"appeared to be between Huma Abedin and Hillary Clinton (the latter who
appears to have used a number of different email addresses)." The case
agent also noted in that email that he was "obviously" unable to "review
any emails to which Anthony Weiner is not a party (such as emails
between Ms. Abedin and Mrs. Clinton)." The October 3 email was
serialized and inserted into the Weiner case file in Sentinel, the FBI's
case management system, on October 5.

The case agent told the OIG that no one had contacted him about the
laptop and, as the case agent, "the only person who has the authority to
release that laptop's image is me." The case agent explained his growing
concern by stating:

The crickets I was hearing was really making me uncomfortable because
something was going to come crashing down.. And my understanding,
which is uninformed because.I didn't work the Hillary Clinton matter.
My understanding at the time was I am telling you people I have private
Hillary Clinton emails, number one, and BlackBerry messages, number two.
I'm telling you that we have potentially 10 times the volume that
Director Comey said we had on the record. Why isn't anybody here? Like,
if I'm the supervisor of any CI squad in Seattle and I hear about this,
I'm getting on with headquarters and saying, hey, some agent working
child porn here may have Hillary Clinton emails. Get your ass on the
phone, call the case agent, and get a copy of that drive, because
that's how you should be. And that nobody reached out to me within,
like, that night, I still to this day I don't understand what the hell
went wrong.

The case agent told us that he scheduled a meeting on October 19 with
the two SDNY AUSAs assigned to the Weiner investigation because he felt
like he had nowhere else to turn. He described AUSA 1, the lead
prosecutor, as a friend. He added, "I felt like if I went there and
AUSA 1 got the attention of Preet Bharara, maybe they'd kick some of
these lazy FBI folks in the butt and get them moving." The case agent
stated that he told the AUSAs in detail about the emails he had seen
between Clinton and Abedin. He continued:

And I told her, I'm a little scared here. I don't know what to do
because I'm not political. Like I don't care who wins this election, but
this is going to make us look really, really horrible. And it could ruin
this case, too. And.I said the thing that also bothers me is that
Comey's testimony is inaccurate. And as a big admirer of the guy, and I
think he's a straight shooter, I wanted to, I felt like he needed to
know, like, we got this. And I didn't know if he did.

The AUSAs both told us that the case agent appeared to be very stressed
and worried that somehow he would be blamed in the end if no action was
taken. AUSA 1 stated that the case agent worried that the information
relating to the Clinton emails had not been provided to the right people
and AUSA 2 observed that the case agent "was getting, for lack of a
better word, paranoid that, like, somebody was not acting appropriately,
somebody was trying to bury this."

**VII. SDNY Response to Weiner Case Agent Concerns**

A.  **SDNY Internal Discussions on October 20**

On October 20, 2016, the AUSAs met with their supervisors at SDNY and
informed them of their conversation with the Weiner case agent. The
AUSAs stated that they told their supervisors the substantive
information reported by the case agent, the case agent's concerns that
no one at the FBI had expressed interest in this information, and their
concern that the case agent was stressed out and might act out in some
way.

SDNY Deputy U.S. Attorney Joon Kim said that after being briefed on this
issue and discussing it with U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara and other
supervisors in the office, SDNY leadership made the decision to call the
Office of the Deputy Attorney General (ODAG) about this information. As
Kim told us, "I remember our discussing it and saying, look, it's not
really our business. And, but maybe to be safe we should reach out and
call."

Bharara also recalled being briefed on the case agent's concerns and
being told that the discovery of the Clinton emails had been "reported
up the chain of command at the FBI." He stated that SDNY recognized that
they had no involvement in the Clinton email server case and "wanted to
stay in our lane." Nevertheless, given the concerns and "agitation" of
the case agent, Bharara said that he and the SDNY leadership team
decided to contact ODAG in case "something had fallen through the
cracks."

A.  **SDNY Calls to ODAG and NSD on October 21**

The following day, October 21, Kim reached out to ODAG about this issue.
Kim told us that he was unsure about whom to call because SDNY did not
know which office had handled the Clinton email server investigation.
Kim called the Associate Deputy Attorney General (ADAG) who was SDNY's
primary point of contact in ODAG. Kim stated that the ADAG told him to
contact DAAG George Toscas in NSD. The ADAG told us that she vaguely
recalled a conversation where she put Kim and Toscas in touch with each
other to discuss an issue arising out of the Weiner case. The ADAG
stated that PADAG Axelrod "wanted me to make sure that SDNY and George
from NSD connected directly so that whatever it was that SDNY was doing
would be coordinated with whatever it was NSD was doing." The ADAG told
us that Axelrod "checked in with me a number of times" to ensure Kim
and Toscas had connected. At 7:08 p.m. that evening, the ADAG emailed
Axelrod, "One last FYI---I also spoke with George Toscas earlier to
give heads up and then to Joon Kim. They have since connected and
will take it from there." Axelrod recalled that SDNY contacted the ADAG
about the presence of Clinton emails on the Weiner laptop. Axelrod told
us that this call "set off alarm bells" and he wanted to make sure the
information was immediately provided to Toscas and
NSD.^[^158^](#fn158){#fnref158 .footnote-ref}^

Kim did not recall the specifics of his conversation with Toscas, but
stated that he generally gave Toscas an overview of the Weiner
investigation and told him he wanted to make sure those connected with
the Clinton email server investigation were aware of the information the
case agent had found. Toscas told us the information provided by Kim was
much more substantive than the prior information that NSD had received
from McCabe on October 3. Toscas described his call with Kim as "the
first time that I actually got information like something you could
actually think through and analyze." Toscas's notes from the call
stated:

10/21/16, 3:50 p.m.: Anthony Weiner. N.C. 15 yr-old  asked her to send
video/photos. Got his laptop/phone etc. + got SW for child exploitation
 FBI following normal protocol (to/from images). Although its his
laptop, his wife apparently used it. 100K's of her emails some to/from
HRC.

Told NSD Prosecutor 1 to tell Pete Strzok + DHL Laufman
10/21 4:05 p.m.

According to Toscas, his notes represent in essence the entirety of the
information he received from Kim. In our interview, Toscas specifically
commented on the fact that he was told by Kim that there were hundreds
of thousands of Abedin's emails on this laptop, some of which were to
and from Clinton. Toscas stated that he immediately called NSD
Prosecutor 1 and told him to contact Strzok and Laufman. Toscas
explained that he meant Prosecutor 1 should tell them "that there's this
issue and we're going to be getting together to talk...and get more
information on it."

At 4:04 p.m. on October 21, Kim emailed the SDNY prosecutors and
leadership to inform them that he had just spoken with Toscas. AUSA 2
then called the Weiner case agent to let him know that SDNY had raised
this issue with Main Justice. The case agent emailed AUSA 2 that
evening, "Thanks for the call. I feel much better about it. Not to sound
sappy, but I appreciate you guys understanding how uneasy I felt about
the situation." The case agent also emailed his SSA and another agent at
5:51 p.m.:

Just got a call from SDNY. The AUSAs understood my concerns
yesterday about the nature of the stuff I have on Weiner computer (ie,
that I will be scapegoated if it comes out that the FBI had this stuff).
They appreciated that I was in a tight spot and spoke to their chain of
command who agreed.

So they called down to DOJ, who will apparently now make a decision on
what to do. This is a good thing according to SDNY because it means we
(FBI C20) went above and beyond to make known that the material was of
potential concern. It is out of my hands now so now I know I did the
right thing by speaking up.

Abedin's emails had been found on Weiner's laptop. Axelrod stated that
this information "didn't trigger any alarm bells."

SDNY probably will talk to crim management at NYO to inform them that
DOJ is aware and handling. I feel much better about this now. But I
wanted you to have a heads up in case the ASAC called you.

At 4:41 p.m. that same day, Kim called the A/SAC to inform him of the
call to ODAG. The A/SAC's notes stated, "Joon Kim -- Weiner -- looking
at the computer -- ton of emails related to Huma that we are not looking
at. SDNY reached out to DOJ and advised there are a lot of emails
between Huma and Hillary and others but that we are doing nothing and
have no basis to do that." The A/SAC told us that he was "glad" that Kim
had made the call, explaining that "I've been an agent for 21 years, so
I knew that this was something I would try to get probable cause for."

**C. SDNY Memo on October 21**

On October 21, the SDNY Chief Counsel began drafting a memorandum
summarizing SDNY's involvement with the issue of the Clinton emails on
the Weiner laptop. Bharara told us that he instructed the Chief Counsel
to write the memorandum in order to "put down, precisely, and with a
hundred percent accuracy, you know, what we did, what the timeline was,
and why we did what we did." Bharara told us that he decided to take
this step because "things seemed unusual to" him and he anticipated that
SDNY would be asked questions about this in the future. Kim provided a
similar explanation for the memorandum, stating that SDNY leadership
"concluded at this point that we should have something in the document,
either email or memo, that laid out the chronology as, to make sure that
if people did ask that, you know, we had it, we had it down on paper."

The memorandum was dated October 21, 2016, and the Chief Counsel emailed
the memorandum to the relevant SDNY personnel on October 24. We have
excerpted the portions most relevant to our review below:

.The Weiner search warrant did not provide authority to search
for evidence of any other crimes beyond the child exploitation
offenses detailed above. We advised the Weiner agents of the
proper scope of the search warrant and they understood the scope.

.The case agent's search of emails stored on the computer
apparently recovered in excess of 700,000 emails. In order to stay
within the scope authorized by the warrant, the case agent sorted
the emails recovered by sender. In performing that sort, we understand
that header information for all of the emails was visible, and he
noticed a very large number of emails that appear to be between Huma
Abedin and Hillary Clinton. The case agent believes that, although
Weiner's counsel provided the computer to us, the computer was used by
both Anthony Weiner and Huma Abedin.

We understand that the FBI agents in our case will not be reviewing the
contents of the Abedin-Clinton emails because it would not be
appropriate to do so under the search warrant issued in support of our
child exploitation investigation. The agents, however, have reported the
existence of the emails up their chain of command at FBI to enable other
agents to take any action that is appropriate for their cases.

Because we understand that another component of DOJ may be conducting an
investigation related to Hillary Clinton's emails, we have advised ODAG
and George Toscas at NSD, who we're told is the most senior career
prosecutor involved in investigations of Hillary Clinton and the Clinton
Foundation, of the existence of the emails so that they can take any
steps that may be appropriate in their investigation, including, if
proper, making an application for the content of potentially hundreds of
thousands of emails that are outside the scope of the warrant in our
case, which authorized a search only for evidence of child exploitation
crimes.^[^159^](#fn159){#fnref159 .footnote-ref}^

**VIII. DOJ and FBI Response to SDNY Notification**

As mentioned above, Toscas called Prosecutor 1 on October 21, after his
phone call with Kim, and told Prosecutor 1 to notify Strzok and Laufman
about the issue. Laufman stated that he could not recall the date he
first heard about the Weiner laptop, but told us that he recalled
Prosecutor 1 coming into his office and telling him that he had gotten a
call from SDNY. Laufman said Prosecutor 1 stated that the prosecutors on
the Weiner case told him that material on Weiner's laptop "appeared on
its face potentially to relate to the Clinton investigation."

As discussed previously, until Prosecutor 1 called Strzok on October 21
to see if he was aware of the Weiner laptop issue, no one from the FBI
had spoken with anyone from the Midyear prosecution team to inform them
about the issue. The only contact that occurred prior to that regarding
the laptop was the call previously described from McCabe to McCord on
October 3.

**A. Prosecutor 1-Strzok Call on October 21**

At 5:41 p.m. on October 21, Prosecutor 1 sent an email to Strzok
entitled "Call." The email stated, "Pete, George Toscas called me and
wanted me to pass along some information to you as soon as I could. Let
me know if you have a couple of minutes to talk. I left a message on
your cell. I am about to head out and can be reached on my cell.
Thanks."

Strzok and Page exchanged the following text messages on the evening of
October 21. The sender of each text message is identified after the
timestamp.

6:49 p.m., Strzok: "Also, work-wise, Prosecutor 1 called b/c Toscas
now aware NY has hrc-huma emails via weiner invest. Told he sic we
knew. Wanted to know our thoughts on getting it. George Toscas
wanted to ensure info got to Andy McCabe. I told Bill Priestap."

6:55 p.m., Page: "I'm sure Andy is aware, but whatever."

Strzok told us he had a conversation at some point with either Toscas or
Prosecutor 1, and thought that the conversation with Prosecutor 1
referenced in the text message was likely that conversation. Strzok told
us that he had not talked about the Weiner laptop issue with Prosecutor
1 previously and he believed this was his first discussion with the
Midyear prosecutors about the Weiner laptop. Strzok stated that
Prosecutor 1 asked if Strzok was aware of "the potential Huma stuff up
in the Weiner laptop in New York." Strzok said that when he responded
affirmatively, Prosecutor 1 asked, "And, you know, what are you doing
about it, and, you know, kind of what do we need to do, and kind of the
path forward on it." Page told us that she did not remember any of the
specifics about this text message.

Prosecutor 1 stated that Toscas told him "the basic facts" about the
Weiner laptop and told Prosecutor 1 to call Strzok. Prosecutor 1 stated
that he did not "recall getting much detail" from Toscas. Prosecutor 1
told us that the October 21 phone call from Toscas was the first time he
was informed of the potential presence of Midyear material on the Weiner
laptop.

**B. FBI Leadership Knowledge of SDNY Notification on October 21**

We asked other FBI officials about the call by SDNY to ODAG. McCabe,
Priestap, and Rybicki told us that they were unaware of the call. McCabe
also said he did not recall any discussion with Page about the Weiner
laptop at this time. We asked McCabe if he we was aware of the fact that
the Weiner case agent had expressed concern that nothing was happening
with the Clinton emails discovered on the Weiner laptop. McCabe stated
that he was not aware of that and told us he found it "disturbing."

Comey did not recall being briefed about either the SDNY call to ODAG or
NSD contacting the FBI about the Weiner laptop issue. Comey told us,
though, that the fact of these communications is not something that
would necessarily need to be briefed to the Director. We asked
Comey---looking only at the Strzok-Page text messages excerpted
above---if he found it concerning that McCabe, Priestap, Strzok, Page,
Toscas, and Prosecutor 1 were all apparently aware of the presence of
"hrc-huma emails" on the Weiner laptop by October 21 and no one bothered
to inform him. Comey replied:

The fact that who these people are doesn't matter, but if there's
something that I found hugely significant on the 27th, if I was in a
position to know that before then, then I should have been informed
earlier. And like I said, honest to God I can't remember being informed
before that.

### 0.0.3. C. Toscas Asks McCabe About Weiner Laptop on October 24^[^160^](#fn160){#fnref160 .footnote-ref}^ {#c.-toscas-asks-mccabe-about-weiner-laptop-on-october-24}

McCabe told the OIG about a passing interaction with Toscas after a
morning Attorney General briefing that he had "towards the end of
October." McCabe stated:

I wouldn't even characterize it as a discussion, but a comment, I think,
that I think that George Toscas mentioned to me on the tail end of a
morning AG brief, like hey, whatever, whatever happened to that thing
with the laptop in New York or whatever. And I remember thinking, like,
I got to, oh, I don't know. Let me find out. I've got to follow up on
that.

McCabe also stated:

I think he thought, like.you should ask about this. You should take a
look at this thing. Like, or what, what are you guys thinking you want
to do with this kind of thing was, was how he asked about it. And so he
was clearly bringing it to my attention because he wanted to make sure
that I was tracking it, and weighing in on it.

McCabe stated that this interaction with Toscas caused him to follow up
with the team on the Weiner laptop issue and also to call Mary McCord at
NSD. McCabe stated that all of this occurred "right around the same
time" and "maybe even the same day." He stated that "this all is what
compels me to talk to the Director and to tell him that we need to have
a meeting about this." We discuss McCabe's call to McCord and his
conversation with Comey in more detail below.

McCabe noted during our interview that briefings for the Attorney
General were typically held three times a week on Mondays, Wednesdays,
and Fridays. McCabe's calendar contained entries for an "AG/OGA Brief"
at 9.a.m. on both

Monday, October 24 and Wednesday, October 26. As noted above, Kim's call
to Toscas occurred in the afternoon of Friday, October 21, and therefore
after the usual time for the morning AG briefing. Also, as noted below,
McCabe spoke to McCord on Tuesday, October 25. Based on this timing and
McCabe's testimony that he spoke with Toscas prior to calling McCord, we
believe the conversation with

Toscas occurred on Monday, October 24.^[^161^](#fn161){#fnref161
.footnote-ref}^

Toscas described this interaction as "just a passing comment at the end
of our Attorney General briefing." Toscas stated that either he or
someone else asked McCabe, "Hey, what's happening.what's the next
step with respect to these, you know, what we learned about the stuff on
the laptop." According to Toscas, McCabe stated that "the Midyear
team was going to be either sent or had been sent or tasked with doing
that."

Page also told us about this interaction between McCabe and Toscas. She
said that Toscas's comment prompted McCabe to ask, "Hey, where are
we on the Weiner stuff?" Page described this a catalyst for the Midyear
team to reengage on the issue of the Weiner laptop.

Strzok's contemporaneous notes from October 25 included a reference to
this conversation between Toscas and McCabe on October 24. The notes
stated, "Toscas saw Andy: What's the *Bureau* doing? DD spoke w/Mary
McCord."

(Emphasis in original). We asked Strzok about these notes. Strzok
stated:

My recollection is that on this date, or whenever it was, at some
point, Toscas runs into the Deputy and says, hey, there are, and I think
this might have been, I heard there are potentially emails having to do
with Clinton on the case up in New York. What are you guys doing? And
then, so, and I don't know if the, if the Deputy then spoke to Mary
McCord about it or not. But in any event, Toscas prompting Andy,
then caused Andy to ask Bill Priestap, hey, what's going on? Where
are we with regard to that process? What are we, what do we need to do
to look at it? Are you engaged, essentially? And get an update. And so
Bill then brings that back down and relays that to me.

McCabe described himself as "concerned" when the Weiner laptop came to
his attention again and said that he asked the team to explain why he
had not been updated. McCabe stated:

Ultimately, when I got the feedback on the status, what I was told was
that when the team went up the first time because of their legal
limitations they, they really weren't able to dig into the thing, to
make an assessment of what was there. And so therefore they couldn't
recommend to us what we should do with it. And so that some, they had to
go back to the district, either get a new search warrant or modify the
previous search warrant, and that's essentially what had taken place
over the intervening time.

McCabe said he would have expected the team to report this information
to him directly rather than getting asked about it by Department
personnel. We asked McCabe who was responsible for following up on the
Weiner laptop. McCabe told us his understanding was that Strzok "was
actually doing it" and Priestap would have had an oversight role. In
fact, as discussed previously, nobody on the FBI Midyear team had taken
any steps to follow up on the laptop, including steps to obtain legal
authority to review its contents, after they learned about it in late
September.

**D. Call between McCabe, Sweeney, and NYO Criminal SAC on October 24**

NYO ADIC Sweeney's Outlook calendar contained the following entry for
October 24: "7:30 pm-7:45 pm Telcal w/DD and the incoming NYO Criminal

SAC." At the time of the call, the SAC was transitioning from an FBI
job in Washington, D.C. to the Criminal SAC job in NYO. Although not
reflected in his calendar entry, Sweeney told us he was "pretty sure"
that during this call he mentioned to McCabe that SDNY had called Main
Justice about the Weiner matter. Sweeney stated that he did not recall
McCabe's response to this information.

The SAC told us that Sweeney called him at some point during the week of
October 24 while McCabe was giving him a ride home. The SAC told us that
he almost immediately put Sweeney on speaker phone and the three
discussed several topics. The SAC continued, "I don't remember
specifics. But I do remember talking about, it did come up regarding the
Weiner laptop." The SAC stated that he also believed that it "wasn't a
first impression," meaning it did not seem like the first time Sweeney
and McCabe had discussed the Weiner laptop.

McCabe told us that he had no recollection of this phone call.

**IX. Reengagement of FBI Headquarters and the Midyear Team on the
Weiner Laptop**

Beginning on October 25, both McCabe and the FBI Midyear team took a
renewed interest in the issue of the Weiner laptop. We discuss this
renewed interest below, including conversations by McCabe with both the
Department and Comey about the laptop, and reengagement by the Midyear
team.

**A. McCabe Phone Call with McCord on October 25**

McCabe and McCord both told us that they discussed the Weiner laptop in
a phone call in late October, though neither could recall the specific
date. McCord provided contemporaneous notes from the call, but they were
undated. Page also provided notes that referenced this call and her
notes suggest the conversation occurred on October 25. Given the
timeline of other events, we believe October 25 is the date on which
this conversation occurred.

McCabe stated that he wanted to update McCord on the status of the
Weiner laptop and tell her that "we have a problem here that we need to
deal with." McCabe said he thought that he would have asked McCord about
"scope of the warrant issues," although he told us he did not remember
many details about the conversation.

Page's contemporaneous notes from October 25 included McCord's name and
phone number, and stated: "*Anthony Weiner* --- ADIC NY -- where are we
on this? □ Not sure we can legally look at the material --- Mary McCord
~~needs to~~ will find out where it is, status of the request."

McCord stated that McCabe told her that NYO had found "many hundreds of
thousands of emails from Huma Abedin to Secretary Clinton" on the
laptop. According to McCord, McCabe stated that the Midyear team had
planned to review, but SDNY told them to hold off while they examined
the legality of doing that under the Weiner search warrant. McCord's
notes from the phone call included entries that stated, "mid-year team
to try to determine if duplicative or new" and "Spoke to Sweeney last
night." McCord told us that the entry about Sweeney referred to a
conversation McCabe stated that he had with Sweeney the prior night.

McCord told us that she spoke with Toscas after the call with McCabe.
According to McCord, Toscas stated that "SDNY had not shopped a search
warrant on the laptop" and that the Midyear team was "getting together
tomorrow to decide whether they want to search it and if they have
probable cause to get a warrant." Toscas told us that he did not recall
a conversation between McCabe and McCord, but added that "it seems like
something that would be in the ordinary course of what happened and
would not stand out to me." We also showed McCord's notes to Toscas.
Toscas commented that he did not know what the word "shopped" could mean
in this context.

**B. Comey, McCabe, and Sweeney Discuss the Weiner Laptop on October
25**

On October 25 from 2:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m., numerous FBI executives
participated in one of Director Comey's Quarterly Strategy Review
sessions. According to Sweeney, who participated in the session by
phone, at the conclusion of the discussions, McCabe asked him to stay on
the line. Sweeney told us that only he, McCabe, and Comey
remained.^[^162^](#fn162){#fnref162 .footnote-ref}^

Sweeney's notes from the October 25 discussion stated:

4:15 to 4:30 p.m. -- SVTC -- Short discussion w/D/DD/ADD following main
SVTC re: Clinton Foundation matter. Follow-up following Strategy
Briefing. Brief update re: Weiner investigation; overt legal process and
ability to get fed SW for computer. DD -- need to move forward and
request action consistent with DOJ guidelines/election.

Sweeney described the discussion:

And then when the room clears, McCabe starts talking about the

Weiner laptop.. It goes into an explanation of who Weiner is,
Huma Abedin's husband. She's the chief of staff. This is how these
emails would likely be there. And that gets into a conversation about
authority, like we can't look at this stuff, and we're not doing.

According to Sweeney, the conversation then turned to the NYO Clinton
Foundation investigation.

Sweeney stated that he did not remember McCabe going into detail about
what had been discovered. For example, Sweeney said that he did not
recall McCabe providing the total number of emails on the laptop,
although Sweeney stated McCabe may have mentioned that a large volume of
emails had been discovered. According to Sweeney, McCabe stated that the
Midyear team was "going to look at" the laptop and "get a search
warrant." We asked Sweeney about

Comey's reaction to the discussion of the Weiner laptop. Sweeney
described

Comey as "just absorbing the information."

That evening, according to Sweeney's notes, he made calls to the NYO

A/SAC, incoming NYO Criminal SAC, the Criminal Investigative Division
AD, and Rybicki. The notes also included an entry for a follow-up call
to McCabe. Each of these entries noted a discussion related to Sweeney's
earlier call with Comey and McCabe and the Clinton Foundation
investigation. The entries for the calls with Rybicki and the Criminal
Investigative Division AD also mentioned the Weiner investigation.

McCabe told us that he did not recall the discussion with Comey and
Sweeney about the Weiner laptop and Clinton Foundation investigation.
With regard to the Weiner laptop discussion, McCabe stated, "The
only conversation I recollect with the Director, it probably took place
on the 26th, was telling him you need to have a meeting on this
tomorrow. And as I said before, I remember that as being a one-on-one in
his office." Comey said that he did not recall the discussion with
McCabe and Sweeney about the Weiner laptop and Clinton Foundation.

**C. Midyear Team Emails on October 25**

Strzok and FBI Attorney 1 exchanged the followings emails on October 25.
The subject line of the email was "Weiner Material" and the sender of
each email is identified after the timestamp.

2:55 p.m., Strzok: "Sorry to bother you, DoJ called McCabe looking
for status of our potential review of the huma-hrc emails. Where/with
who is that decision now? What would we need to do to get a decision?
Thanks, Pete".

3:31 p.m., FBI Attorney 1: "Is this the NY search warrant issue? We were
waiting for NYO to get back to us about the volume of Huma related
emails on the devices."

3:35 p.m., Strzok: "Yes. I thought they said thousands? But I have no
idea who I heard that from. Who at NYO is supposed to tell us?"

3:38 p.m., FBI Attorney 1: "I'miss sic not sure. The Midyear SSA
was working with the NYO SSA. Thousands? I hadn't heard any numbers."

3:45 p.m., Strzok: "OK I'll ask the Midyear SSA".

This exchange is immediately followed by an email exchange between
Strzok, FBI Attorney 1, and the Midyear SSA entitled "Weiner emails."
Again, the sender of each email is identified after the timestamp.

3:47 p.m., Strzok: "Have you gotten an idea how many Huma-HRC emails
are in the Weiner stuff? Has popped up on people's radars again".

4:34 p.m., Midyear SSA: "NY did not have an estimate of the number of
emails during our lync call on 9/29/2016. I have not heard back from NY
but can contact the A/SAC or ASAC.if needed for an update. FBI
Attorney 1 -- do you know the status of the SW and whether we can
review the emails?"

4:58 p.m., FBI Attorney 1: "They never did send me the actual SW, but
based on they're sic representations, we won't be able to review the
emails without additional process or consent."

5:00 p.m., Strzok: "Yes please contact NY for \#s. Thanks".

We asked Strzok, FBI Attorney 1, and the SSA about this exchange. We
told

Strzok that this exchange suggested that nothing had happened since the

September 29 call. Strzok replied, "That's right. That's my assumption I
believe. Yep." FBI Attorney 1 stated that Strzok's email was the first
time she recalled hearing about the Weiner laptop issue since September
29. The Midyear SSA agreed that this was probably his first contact
about the issue since September 29.

We asked Strzok whether any action would have occurred without the
Department notification to McCabe. Strzok stated:

Probably not. I mean, at some point, yes. At some point, there would
have been a, God, what happened to that follow-up.. This caused
that to happen. There certainly would have been action. Whether that was
the 25th or November 8th, or whenever, I'm not sure when that would have
occurred.

However, Strzok emphasized that, at this point, there "was no indication
on anybody's radar that this was going to result in a notification to
Congress." Instead, Strzok stated that this was something the Midyear
team would have to pursue, but he did not think it had any relevance to
the election.

The Midyear SSA told us that the reason this was "coming on people's
radar again" was because NYO "was saying, hey, once again, we've got
this stuff. What do you want us to do with it?" The Midyear SSA stated
that he reached out to NYO after receiving this email. He recalled that
"New York was somewhat frustrated."

**X. Events Leading to the Decision to Seek a Search Warrant**

In this section, we discuss the meetings, discussions, and emails that
preceded the October 27 briefing where Comey authorized the Midyear team
to seek a search warrant for the Weiner laptop.

**A. Midyear-NYO-SDNY Call on October 26**

At 2:30 p.m. on October 26, Midyear FBI personnel, Midyear prosecutors,
NYO, and SDNY participated in a conference call about the Weiner laptop.
The highest ranking participants for each group on the call were Strzok,
Toscas, the NYO A/SAC, and Kim.

The NYO A/SAC, ASAC, SSA, and Weiner case agent all participated in the
call. This was the first time that the Weiner case agent had spoken
directly with anyone associated with the Midyear investigation. The case
agent told us that he felt he was asked questions about information that
he had already reported up the chain of command in September. He stated:

They were asking questions that I had already repeatedly answered in
other calls. In other words, people were asking what domains are you
seeing? How many emails are you seeing? What do you think you're seeing?
Who are they to, who are they from? What are the domains? Oh, we have
that domain? What years? Like, questions that we, I had been asked and
either had answered preliminarily, and then we became uncomfortable
legally searching for those answers. But these were things that were
known to me and had been made known above me for weeks.

The Weiner case agent stated that "the only thing that was new" was that
others on the call asked him to speculate on what he had seen. According
to the case agent, he stated, "Based on the number of emails, we could
have every email that Huma and Hillary ever sent each other. It's
possible, given the pure volume, it's possible."

The NYO SSA described the call as "just basically discussions and
information about.potentially what.was there, which we still
didn't know because we hadn't looked at anything." The A/SAC thought the
call was "matter-of-fact" and said it was the first time they were
questioned by an NSD lawyer. According to the A/SAC's notes, NYO briefed
that there were 675,000 emails on the laptop spanning a time period from
2006 to 2016, and stated that there "appears to be blackberry messages"
on the laptop.

The FBI's Midyear team told us that they learned important new
information on the call.^[^163^](#fn163){#fnref163 .footnote-ref}^
Strzok described it as "the triggering event" and FBI Attorney 1 stated
that this was the "call where it was crystallized to me what was on the
laptop." Strzok, FBI Attorney 1, and the Lead Analyst each cited two
important pieces of information provided by NYO on the
call.^[^164^](#fn164){#fnref164 .footnote-ref}^ First, the presence of a
large volume of emails on the Weiner laptop, particularly the potential
for a large number of \@clintonemail.com emails. Second, the indication
that the "missing emails," meaning emails from Clinton's first three
months as Secretary of State, could be present on the laptop. Strzok
explained that this was the most important factor and he did not believe
that the Midyear team knew about the potential presence of the
BlackBerry data earlier. Strzok added, "We needed to try and get
this because this is, potentially would alter, would change our
understanding of the investigative conclusions that we arrived at in
July."

We asked Strzok what he was specifically told about the BlackBerry
backups and if he thought these might be Blackberry backups for Clinton.
Strzok stated:

It wasn't Clinton's backups. It was the sense that it was Huma's
backups, and that Huma was frequently used, my recollection, as kind of
a proxy for the, for Secretary Clinton. So if people wanted to get
something to Clinton, they'd email it to Huma and say please print for
the Secretary. And she would, she was a gatekeeper in that way. And, you
know, would print it out and then take it to the Secretary.

I don't, my recollection is that we certainly saw the domain. And that,
the domain, because I think it was, and again, I'm, if I'm wrong forgive
me. Att.Blackberry.net I think was that domain they used for the first
three months, and we saw that on there. I don't know if we had the
granularity of detail to say Huma's account on that domain in that time
frame. I don't know if we had that granularity. But I do know we had, I
think, that domain in the span, coupling with the kind of overall volume
that we thought there was a reasonable likelihood that, that it would be
in there.

When asked how this information differed from the information presented
on the September 29 call, Strzok, who did not participate in the
September 29 call, stated that his understanding from the Midyear SSA
and FBI Attorney 1, who were on that call, was that NYO did not have
"the numbers" or "the volume of domains." Strzok said that he also
thought that NYO had only provided preliminary data on the September
call and "they weren't quite sure what they had yet." Strzok added that
he knew NYO "couldn't review it because it was outside the scope of
their warrant."

FBI Attorney 1 told us, "I don't.even think they discussed any of
that stuff on the September 29 call. They certainly said there was
some clintonemail.com, but again, like I said, that we were finding,
people had clintonemail.com emails all over the place. There was nothing
with this sort of certainty that this is what was on there." The Midyear
SSA stated that NYO provided "numbers" on this call, which he believed
had not been provided previously.

Page told us that as a result of the conference call "we now understand
that the Huma emails are of a volume that it could be meaningful and
that there could be meaningfully new evidence that we have not
previously seen in other materials we had reviewed." She added that the
"volume of emails" coupled with the presence of a "BlackBerry backup"
were the two most important new facts that came out of this call. Page's
notes from the call were entitled "Good news, in a bad news way (MYE)."
She explained this heading by stating:

My good news in a bad news way is a reflection of like, well, more
evidence is always good news. It might either change our decision or
outcome or further substantiate the outcome we reached. In a bad news
way because, like, I cannot believe we are, we are here. We are doing
this again on October 26th. Like, oh, my goodness.

FBI Attorney 1 told us that the decision to obtain a search warrant was
made either on the call or shortly after it. FBI Attorney 1 noted that
Toscas was on the call and "seemed to be on board" with the idea that
the Midyear team needed to get the Weiner laptop. FBI Attorney 1 added
that she was "surprised" that the Department left the call "talking
about getting a search warrant." She explained that she was surprised
because it "definitely was.more aggressive than they had been
before," but thought this may have been due to "the time pressure."

Prosecutor 2 told us that this call was when she first learned about the
Weiner laptop. Prosecutor 2 stated that the prosecutors asked numerous
questions to NYO and SDNY personnel "to try to figure out what they knew
about the emails and, and about the devices, so we knew what the scope
of like what we could look at." Toscas stated that the information he
learned in late October about the Weiner laptop, including information
provided on this call, was markedly different than what he had been told
McCabe had informed NSD about in early October. Toscas described the
information provided earlier in October as "totally off base" and he
told us that he attributed this discrepancy to a "garble," or
miscommunication.

**B. Briefing of McCabe on October 26**

Page told us that the team briefed McCabe about the information from the
conference call on the evening of October 26. Page stated that McCabe
indicated that "we're going to need to reopen. This, this is
significant. Or we're going to need to at least seek a search warrant to
sort of look at this material." Page stated, "We informed the Deputy
Director, and he says, yeah, we've got to get this in front of the
Director tomorrow. And so that gets scheduled for the next day.to
tell him what we found and what the team thinks, which is certainly we
need to go get a warrant for this information." On the morning of
October 27, at 6:10 a.m., Baker sent Page an email entitled "Follow up"
and asked her if she had talked to McCabe yet and whether "McCabe
talked to Comey?" Page replied at 6:19 a.m., stating, "Yes I did
talk to Andy, but he did not connect with Comey. Andy sent him an
email this morning asking that he get a briefing from the MYE team." We
describe McCabe's email and the events of October 27 below.

Strzok said that he thought that he and possibly the Lead Analyst and
FBI Attorney 1 briefed McCabe after the conference call. Strzok stated
that he explained the scope of what NYO possessed, why that was
important, and why the Midyear team thought they should review the
material. FBI Attorney 1 said that she recalled briefing "the
executives" about what they had learned on the conference call and the
need to "look into this" using process.

Priestap told us that he did not recall this briefing with McCabe, but
stated that he would normally be present for such a briefing. Priestap
stated, "Very rarely would my team be there if I wasn't there."

McCabe told us that he could not recall who informed him of the
substance of the conference call with SDNY and NYO, but stated it would
have been some combination of Strzok, Priestap, the Lead Analyst, Page,
and FBI Attorney 1. When asked what he was told, McCabe stated:

The only thing I remember is like we had at that point confirmed that,
yes, there is no doubt what appears to be relevant email for us on this
laptop. So the question then becomes like do we go full-bore into
another round of exploitation along the lines of what we had already
done in Midyear? How do we handle this thing? And then the implications
of like notification and, and everything that they ended up struggling
with the next day.

McCabe said that he did not recall any mention of seeing domains or
emails associated with a BlackBerry device. We asked McCabe what was
relayed that was not known in late September. McCabe replied:

I think they had looked a little bit deeper than just the tos and froms
and could actually say, like, you know, I seem to remember in the kind
of legally restricted view it was just kind of a snapshot having
looking, you know, at stuff and then determined they couldn't look
further. That's how they had a sense of what was there. Now, at this
point, we had done some sort of more extensive review to say, okay,
yeah, it's like this number between these people, that sort of thing.

McCabe stated that he could not remember who had conducted this "more
extensive review" and "was surprised" to learn that no one from the
Midyear team reviewed the laptop until October 30. McCabe told us that
he assumed someone on the Midyear team had reviewed the laptop
"because that's what I initially asked for." We asked McCabe if the
fact that no one from Midyear had reviewed the laptop was an important
fact that the team should have been brought to his attention. McCabe
stated:

I know that I asked them to go up there and look at it. And they had

a.SVTC with the team I think the following day. I think at some point
I learned that they had a SVTC early on in this. In this process rather
than traveling up there. But I certainly expected that our folks would
be in New York looking at what we had on that laptop.

We asked McCabe why this issue was coming back to the forefront on
October 26 instead of sometime earlier. McCabe stated that it was
"because I started asking questions about it probably." We also
asked McCabe what would have occurred if SDNY had not contacted ODAG and
Toscas had not mentioned the Weiner laptop to McCabe after the morning
briefing. McCabe said he could not speculate on what would have happened
if the facts were different, but stated that "it certainly is a good
thing that George Toscas brought it to my attention." McCabe added, "Is
it something that I should have been getting briefed upon as the month
went on? Absolutely." McCabe told us that he had no idea why the topic
of the Weiner laptop "wasn't making its way into the agenda for those
regular meetings and interactions with Page, Strzok, Steinbach,
the Director."

We also asked Baker why the Weiner laptop issue reemerged at this time.
Baker stated:

My understanding, it was simply that senior managers thought that
they had delegated this to the right people and that the issue was being
worked. And that they would come back with a proposal about what to do,
and that we took the, took our collective eyes off the ball, didn't pay
attention to it, and when it came back and we were informed that it was
not resolved, then it became a crisis. That's the best I can reconstruct
for you.

**C. McCabe Recollection of Discussion with Comey on October 26**

McCabe told us that he remembered mentioning the issue of the Weiner
laptop to Comey twice. The first, as we described previously, McCabe
stated was shortly after he learned of the laptop in late September. The
second time McCabe stated was toward "the end of October"---McCabe
estimated it was on October 26--- when he sat down with Comey
"one-on-one" in Comey's office. McCabe stated:

I told him we need to have a meeting on this because now we have some,
you know, some clarity on, on what's in this laptop. I specifically
remember telling him, this is about that laptop we discussed a couple of
weeks ago. I don't know if he remembered it.

McCabe stated that he did not remember Comey asking him about the Weiner
laptop during the period between the two meetings. McCabe told us that
he believed that second meeting with Comey "was truly the second time
that we discussed it."

We asked McCabe to describe Comey's reaction to this second conversation
about the Weiner laptop. McCabe stated:

The best of my recollection it was just kind of an acknowledgement that,
like, this was a very complicated issue that had a lot of problematic,
you know, kind of downstream, there are all kinds of decision and issues
that were related to this. It would be complicated and, and we need to
figure it out.

McCabe said that he did not recall Comey mentioning the issue of
congressional notification during this conversation.

As mentioned earlier, Comey told us that he dimly recalled being
informed about the Weiner laptop in the "beginning of October." Comey
stated that he did not remember hearing of the Weiner laptop again until
McCabe emailed him on the morning of October 27.

**D. McCabe Email to Comey on October 27**

On October 27, at 5:20 a.m., McCabe sent an email to Comey entitled
"MYR." Rybicki, Bowdich, and Page were cc'd on the email. It stated,
"Boss, The MYR team has come across some additional actions they believe
they need to take. I think we should probably gather today to discuss
implications if you have any space on your calendar. I am happy to join
by phone. Will push to Lisa and Jim to coordinate if you are good." At
7:13 a.m., Comey responded, "Copy."

McCabe told us that he felt the situation was "absolutely urgent" and
that is why he proposed an October 27 meeting with Comey even though
McCabe knew he would be out of town that day. When asked why it was
urgent, McCabe stated that the situation was urgent because "it's been
sitting around for three weeks," "it's important," and "it's getting
closer to" the election. We questioned McCabe about the tone of the
email, pointing out that phrases such as "we should probably gather
today" and "if you have any space on your calendar" did not suggest
urgency. McCabe disagreed, stating, "I mean, by me saying I think we
should probably gather today, that's me saying this can't wait until
tomorrow." McCabe told us that he assumed his second conversation with
Comey, which he estimated was on October 26, "predated this email" and
the email was simply the notification to Comey to set up the meeting.

We also asked Comey about the tone of McCabe's email and whether the
phrasing suggested a lack of urgency. Comey replied:

No, I didn't take it that way since he's emailing me at 5:20 a.m. I mean
I took this, and the reason I remember it that way is, you don't send
the Director a dawn email about it would be nice to get together to talk
about how we're going to celebrate Arbor Day. I mean this is, the
Midyear team has come across some additional actions they believe they
need to take. And so I took it as, I believe what it intended is, we
need to speak to you.

We asked Comey if knew what this email was about when he received it. He
stated:

I don't think so. I don't remember---when I got this, I don't remember,
because my recollection is as I told you, is walking into the conference
room with this grin on my face because they're all sitting in the same
seats and sitting down and saying something like the band is back
together, what's going on? And seeing these sort of dark faces, so I
don't---at least to my recollection, this is the first time that this
dawn email from Andy is we need to speak to you because the Midyear team
has some additional actions they need to take and it didn't, I don't
remember this resonating context, resonating from this like, okay, let's
do it.

Comey also told us that he did not initially recall that he had been
previously notified about the Weiner laptop. He explained:

October 27th, Andy.sent me an email early in the morning saying that
the Midyear Team needs to meet with you today. And I responded, of
course. And I actually don't---I've thought about it since, I remember
now, but I didn't focus on it at the time. I was aware sometime in the
first week or two of October that there was a laptop that a criminal
squad had seized from Anthony Weiner in New York and someone said to
me.kind of in passing, they're trying to figure out whether it has
any connection to the Midyear investigation.. And it's funny, when I
was first reminded, I didn't even remember---by my staff saying,
remember this is the laptop they mentioned to you. And I said, I don't
remember being told about a laptop, but it definitely was sometime in
early October.

**E. Midyear Team Communications Preceding Comey Briefing on October
27**

On October 27, at 6:49 a.m., Page sent an email entitled "MYE" to
Bowdich,

Rybicki, Baker, Anderson, FBI Attorney 1, Strzok, the Lead Analyst,
Priestap,

McCabe, and Comey's administrative assistant. The email stated, "Team,
The Deputy has asked that we convene today to inform the Director about
what we know regarding the laptop in NY. Time is TBD, but I just wanted
to alert you all now."

Strzok sent an email to the Lead Analyst a few minutes later about the
briefing, stating, "I've got this. Will grab you and run down brief.
Promise to make at least one sponsorship plug for William and Mary and
one gratuitous yuck yuck joke about de-duping or getting the band back
together." We asked Strzok about the tone of the email and his state of
mind at the time. Strzok stated that it was a "here we go again" moment,
meaning that he was thinking that "we've got to get the team back
together and make sure all the systems are set up and figure out how
we're going to get CART to do it." Strzok added that he was not thinking
about a letter to Congress at this point. Strzok told us that the first
time the issue of congressional notification came up is during the
briefing with Comey.

At 6:55 a.m., Strzok sent an email to the Midyear SSA and FBI Attorney 1
asking "Would you please find out when NY got the Weiner laptop?"
and to provide "a rough date for when you initially talked to them
about their warrant." FBI Attorney 1 responded:

The Midyear SSA and I had a conference call with NYO on Sept 29. I
believe they got the devices several days prior to that, but I'm sure
the Midyear SSA can find the exact date. At the time of the call,
due to the volume, the system doing the imaging had just crashed so they
thought it would take into the next week to find out any specifics

about the volume or email domains. We also discussed the fact that we
received this via SW, not consent, so we really couldn't look at the
other emails without additional process or consent. But we wanted to
find out more about what was on the device before deciding what to do
next..

**F. Comey Briefing on October 27**

At 10:00 a.m. on October 27, the Midyear team briefed Comey on what NYO
had discovered on the Weiner laptop. The following individuals were
present for the briefing: Comey, Rybicki, Bowdich, Baker, Steinbach,
Priestap, Strzok, Anderson, Page, FBI Attorney 1, and the Lead Analyst.
McCabe was out of the office on October 27, but phoned in at the start
of the briefing. However, shortly after phoning in, Comey asked McCabe
to "drop off" the call, stating, "I don't need you on this call." Comey
told us that he asked McCabe to leave the call because of the Wall
Street Journal article on October 23 about then Governor McAuliffe's
contributions to McCabe's wife's campaign in 2015. (The circumstances
leading up to Comey's decision to exclude McCabe from this call and
ultimately to McCabe's recusal are discussed in detail in Chapter
Thirteen of this report.) Comey told us that from that point forward
McCabe had no involvement in the Midyear investigation. Page also left
the meeting once Comey asked McCabe to "drop off" the call.

Comey stated that he was told during the briefing:

That the criminal squad had gotten this laptop from---through a
search warrant in New York. They had obtained it in some odd way from
like Anthony Weiner's lawyers or something, but it came from Anthony
Weiner who had been married to Huma Abedin for a number of years. And
that the criminal squad had a search warrant, the scope of which they
obviously were going to abide carefully, but that they had
alerted---sometime in the previous couple of weeks, they had alerted the
Midyear team that from the metadata they could see, there may be
materials that the Midyear team would want to look at. And then they
told me they had engaged in some sort of process where they got---I
don't know what it was, but somehow technically they got the stuff
transferred down here and figured out how they could---what they could
look at properly without a warrant and had been able to look at an image
of that computer and what they saw led them to believe that they needed
to go get a search warrant.

And I said, well tell me what you see. And they said, we see evidence of
many, many, many, thousands and thousands of emails from the period of
Secretary Clinton's tenure as Secretary of State that---I forget how
they said it, but basically that involved the Clinton email address
domain. And they said that's one. Two, we see Verizon.Blackberry.net
email metadata. We don't know what the content is, from the period of
time when Secretary Clinton was using a Blackberry,
Verizon.Blackberry.net account at the beginning of her tenure as
Secretary of State. And I remember them telling me this specifically, we
think this may be the missing three months of emails. And as we talked
about earlier, the reason that would be so important is that could be
germane to an evaluation of her intent which is a central part of our
investigation. They said we think we may have found the missing emails.
We see thousands and thousands of others and so we're highly confident
that there are Secretary Clinton emails on there. Logic tells us that
there will be classified emails on there because even if it's a
duplicate of what she had elsewhere, those classified emails would
be there and we think it may be the missing emails and so we have---we
feel compelled to go get a search warrant.

Comey reiterated that "the volume of emails" and the presence of the
BlackBerry emails were "two highly significant facts" and that the
presence of the BlackBerry emails in particular "weighed very heavily on
me."

Comey told us that the decision to authorize the Midyear team to seek a
search warrant for the Weiner laptop "was an easy decision" and that
there was no controversy over this decision. He noted that the
Department agreed with the decision to seek the search warrant. Comey
stated that "the harder decision was going to be what obligation do
we have in the wake of that." We describe these discussions, which led
to the October 28 letter to Congress, in more detail in Chapter Ten.

Others present for the briefing provided a similar account. Priestap
told us that he recalled Comey asking if the Midyear team needed to
review the Weiner laptop to be satisfied that they have "turned over the
necessary stones" and "be comfortable with the decision we made."
Priestap continued:

And I remember telling him, yes. We don't know with certainty what's in
there. It could be information that we've not seen, you know, thus far,
and so yes.in effect it's dereliction of duty to not, you know this
thing is out here to pass it over. So yes, we've got to, we have to do
it.

Strzok stated that Comey agreed "fairly quickly" with the team's
suggestion to seek a search warrant. Strzok continued, "And then it very
quickly turns to a, okay, so do we need to tell Congress? And that, I
think, in my mind, my recollection the first time that kind of comes
up.."

Anderson told us that Comey asked Strzok and the Lead Analyst:

If we ignore this pool of material, you know, can we still stand
behind the assertion that we've done everything that, that, that we
should have done? And the answer that, you know, that Pete and the
Lead Analyst gave.these are not quotes or anything like that. But
this is sort of like generally the sense, was that, no, we have to
pursue this material, because, you know, we, we would do it in any other
case. And it is, you know, a pool of evidence that hypothetically, now
understandably it's very speculative, but there is that possibility that
it could change our outcome, because of that, you know, that possibility
that it could contain something about intent.

Strzok also cited the missing emails, stating that if data from "that
first three months" was present on the laptop it could be "substantively
different from what we have recovered" to date.

Priestap provided a different perspective on the potential impact of the
material on the Weiner laptop. He told us that he thought the review of
the Weiner laptop was necessary even though he "would have been shocked"
if they found anything on the laptop that changed the outcome of the
Midyear investigation. Priestap explained:

I felt that we had reviewed so much stuff that even if this was all
stuff we hadn't reviewed, the chances that it was going to be some
smoking gun in this subset of communications that didn't come up in all
of this other stuff, again, would have been, would have shocked me.
Could it have been possible? Absolutely. That's why we had to review it.
But again, we had just done so much work and learned and seen so much
else that to think there is going to be a sliver of, you know,
information on nefarious activity that we weren't seeing other places,
I, I just doubt it.

**XI. Analysis**

**A. Failure of the FBI to Take Earlier Action on the Weiner Laptop**

In this section we analyze the failure of the FBI to take any
significant action to obtain access to the contents of the Weiner laptop
for purposes of the Midyear investigation between late September, when
NYO communicated the essential facts about the laptop to the Midyear
team, and late October, when the FBI finally obtained a search warrant
and began the accelerated process of analyzing the laptop's contents. As
detailed below, we found most of the explanations offered for this delay
to be unconvincing. Faster action could and should have been taken to
review the laptop's emails.

By no later than September 29, the FBI had learned virtually every fact
that was cited by the FBI in late October as justification for obtaining
the search warrant for the Weiner laptop, including that the laptop
contained:

- - - Over 340,000 emails, some of which were from domains
            associated with Clinton, including state.gov,
            clintonfoundation.org, clintonemail.com, and
            hillaryclinton.com;
        - Numerous emails between Hillary Clinton and Huma Abedin;
        - An unknown number of BlackBerry communications on the
            laptop, including one or more messages between Abedin and
            Clinton, indicating the possibility that the laptop
            contained communications from the early months of Clinton's
            tenure;^[^165^](#fn165){#fnref165 .footnote-ref}^ and
        - Emails dated beginning in 2007 and covering the entire
            period of Clinton's tenure as Secretary of State.

Much if not all of this information was communicated to FBI Headquarters
and to the FBI Midyear team before the end of September. NYO ADIC
Sweeney described facts about the laptop to senior headquarters
personnel on a September 28 video teleconference. Testimony and
documents show that Sweeney also briefed McCabe, Coleman, Steinbach, and
Priestap individually on September 28. Of equal significance, NYO
briefed the FBI Midyear team about the Weiner laptop in another
conference call on September 29, including providing information that
NYO lacked legal authority to review emails between Abedin and former
Secretary Clinton under the existing search warrant. Witness interviews
and contemporaneous notes show that most or all of the above information
was known to the FBI Midyear team by late September.

The explanations given to the OIG for the FBI's failure to take
immediate action on the Weiner laptop fell into four general categories:

1.  The FBI Midyear team was waiting for additional information about
    the contents of the laptop from NYO, which was not provided until
    late October.

<!-- -->

1.  The FBI Midyear team could not review the emails without additional
    legal authority, such as consent or a new search warrant.

<!-- -->

1.  The FBI Midyear team and senior FBI officials did not believe that
    the information on the laptop was likely to be significant.

<!-- -->

1.  Key members of the FBI Midyear team had been reassigned to the
    investigation of Russian interference in the U.S. election, which
    was a higher priority.

We examine each of these explanations in turn below.

**The FBI Midyear Team was awaiting further information from NYO:**
Several members of the Midyear team offered this explanation, which we
found unpersuasive. To begin with, all participants in the September 29
conference call knew that no one in the FBI could examine the contents
of the emails of interest to the Midyear investigation without first
obtaining either consent or a new search warrant, because the scope of
the existing search warrant issued in the Anthony Weiner investigation
was strictly limited. In addition, Sweeney informed Priestap of this
fact on September 29. Although NYO was still processing the laptop as of
September 29, the completion of this task would not eliminate the need
to obtain proper search authority. It was up to the Midyear team and the
NSD prosecutors to obtain authority to review the emails, not NYO or
SDNY. Yet the FBI Midyear team took no action to inform the prosecutors
about the laptop or to obtain authority to search
it.^[^166^](#fn166){#fnref166 .footnote-ref}^

Even if the FBI Midyear team somehow misapprehended the intentions and
ability of NYO to provide more information about the emails, no one from
the Midyear team followed up when NYO provided no update in the weeks
following the

September 29 call. Had the Midyear team inquired, they would have
learned that NYO completed processing the laptop by around October 4,
but was taking no further actions to review any information, including
emails, unrelated to the Weiner child exploitation investigation---a
fact that had previously been briefed to the FBI Midyear team.

**The FBI Midyear Team needed legal authority to review the emails:**
This explanation for the absence of action, which was given by several
witnesses, is illogical. As described above, the lack of legal authority
to search the laptop related to the investigative interests of the FBI
Midyear team, not to those of the NYO Weiner team. Thus, the factual
information necessary to establish probable cause to obtain a search
warrant for the information that the Midyear team was seeking resided
with the FBI Midyear team, not the NYO Weiner investigation team.
Moreover, this lack of authority to review emails between Abedin and
former Secretary Clinton was known to the FBI Midyear team by September
29. If anything, this explanation should have served as a rationale for
the FBI Midyear team to take affirmative steps to obtain a new search
warrant that provided them with authority to review the emails between
Abedin and Clinton on the Weiner laptop. Instead, the FBI Midyear team
took no action at all to solve this problem. Indeed, they did not even
tell the Midyear prosecutors, who would have to be involved in any
search warrant application process (as they were in late October), about
the NYO discovery on the laptop.

**The FBI Midyear Team did not believe the laptop evidence was likely to
be significant:** Strzok described his view of the Weiner laptop in late
September as simply "a lead that likely is going to result in some
investigation." Strzok stated that the suggestion that the matter should
have been treated with more urgency was "misplaced" because "we did
not know what was there." He stated the team would have reviewed the
emails at some point, perhaps in January or February 2017. Page also
told us that the emails were not yet considered significant at that time
because "emails had been found lots of other places that ultimately
weren't worth pursuing lots of other times." Priestap similarly stated
that he did not expect any new information discovered on the laptop to
"change the outcome of the case" because the team had seen enough
information previously to make him "confident we had gotten to the
bottom of the.issue." While the FBI ultimately concluded, after
obtaining a search warrant and reviewing the ClintonAbedin emails, that
the Weiner laptop contained no significant new evidence, Comey had a
very different view of its potential importance after being briefed on
it on October 27.

The view that the Weiner laptop was unlikely to contain significant
evidence arguably accorded with the FBI's investigative strategy in this
matter, although this approach was inconsistent with what witnesses told
us was a "leave no stone unturned" approach to the investigation. As
detailed in Chapter Five, the FBI Midyear team had decided to obtain or
exploit only those personal devices directly associated with Clinton or
the servers hosting clintonemail.com. The FBI sought no personal devices
used by any other individual to conduct State Department work, including
Mills, Abedin, and Sullivan. This included a decision not to seek the
devices and culled work-related emails in the possession of Abedin's
attorney. Witnesses told us that the team's focus was on Clinton's
conduct as opposed to the conduct of others, including Clinton's senior
aides, and the team assessed that Clinton's devices and the laptops used
to cull her emails were the most likely places to find the complete
collection of emails from her tenure or evidence of Clinton's intent. In
addition, witnesses told us that the Midyear team deemed Abedin's emails
to be less likely to contain classified information given her role and
the nature of her communications with Clinton.

We found the belief that the Weiner laptop was unlikely to contain
significant evidence to be an insufficient justification for neglecting
to take action on the Weiner laptop immediately after September 29.
Unlike the personal devices that the FBI had previously decided not to
attempt to acquire, the Weiner laptop was already in the FBI's custody
and known to contain potentially relevant emails. Even those FBI
officials who told us they did not expect to find new evidence agreed
that it was a logical investigative step to seek to obtain a search
warrant so that they could review the contents of the potentially
relevant emails. In addition, and as we note below, the FBI developed
little additional information about what was on the Weiner laptop
between September 29 and October 27. However, Comey's reaction to the
information he was presented on October 27---which was substantially
similar to what FBI Midyear and Headquarters personnel knew on September
29---suggests that the Weiner laptop should have been viewed as a more
significant discovery.

We hasten to add that not every witness described the Weiner laptop as
being unlikely to contain significant evidence. In particular, McCabe
said he thought that the discovery of the emails on the Weiner laptop
was a "big deal" and that he understood that the FBI Midyear team was
proceeding with obtaining authority to review the laptop contents during
the period immediately after September 29. Yet McCabe took no action for
weeks to obtain a progress report or otherwise ensure completion of the
analysis and when he did finally do so it was in response to Toscas
mentioning the laptop issue to him on October 24. McCabe also did not
convey a much-needed sense of urgency about this matter to Comey.
Instead, he told us he gave Comey a "fly-by" briefing about the
discovery shortly after hearing about it on September 28. Comey told us
he vaguely recalled hearing about the Weiner laptop around this time,
but did not recall learning at that time any of the details that later
caused him to announce the reactivation of the investigation on October
28. As the Deputy Director who was overseeing the Midyear investigation
and who had been briefed by NYO on September 28 on the

Weiner laptop discovery, McCabe should have demanded a progress report
from the

Midyear team and should have provided a full briefing to Comey well
before October 27.^180^

**The Russia investigation was a higher priority:** On July 31, 2016,
just weeks after the conclusion of the Midyear investigation, the FBI
opened its investigation of Russian interference in the ongoing
presidential election. Strzok and several others from the Midyear
investigation were assigned to the Russia investigation, which we were
told was extremely active during this September and October time
period.^181^ Several witnesses, including Priestap, Strzok, and Page,

180. After reviewing a draft of the report, McCabe's counsel submitted a
    written response stating that McCabe shared all of the information
    he knew about the Weiner laptop with Comey soon after he first
    learned about it, and that any claim that McCabe "failed to fully
    inform Director Comey of what he initially knew about the Weiner
    laptop is inaccurate."

The submission also asserts that "the OIG places inordinate weight
on Mr. McCabe's apparent reference during his OIG interview to a 'fly
by' briefing of Director Comey in late September or early October."
However, as noted above, our primary concern was with McCabe's failure
to take any action in the weeks prior to October 24, and then doing so
only in response to Toscas mentioning the laptop issue to him on October
24.

McCabe also asserts in his written response that the "importance of
exploring this collection of emails on the Weiner laptop was not
immediately obvious" because the FBI had learned about various
collections of allegedly relevant emails throughout the Midyear
investigation, most of which turned out to be duplicative of previously
examined emails or of marginal significance---a statement that we note
is at odds with his description of the emails to us during his testimony
as a "big deal." McCabe stated that it was "unfair and misleading" to
place the blame squarely on him for failing to follow up on the Weiner
laptop with sufficient urgency, "even though many people in both FBI
Headquarters and the New York Office were responsible for pushing the
matter forward and failed to do so.\" McCabe described the delays in
reviewing the Weiner laptop as a "failure with many fathers, including
many other FBI executives, and not a shortcoming attributable to Mr.
McCabe alone." McCabe added, "And, while the OIG holds Mr. McCabe
responsible for failing to demand progress reports, it is undeniable
that Director Comey could have asked for updates based on what he had
been told by Mr. McCabe, and he did not.. The OIG's exercise of
hindsight that leads it to place blame on

Mr. McCabe---and only Mr. McCabe---for the failure to more promptly
'demand a progress report,'.ignores the other FBI managers and
executives who dropped the ball."

180. We were surprised to learn that FBI leadership decided to assign
    many of the key members of the Midyear team, immediately after
    determining that no charges should be brought against then candidate
    Clinton, to the Russia investigation, which touched upon the
    campaign of then candidate Trump. This is particularly so given the
    questions being raised by candidate Trump and his supporters
    regarding the declination decision in the Midyear investigation.
    While we recognize that staffing decisions are for management to
    make, we question the judgment of assigning agents who had just
    determined that one candidate running in an election should not be
    prosecuted to an investigation that relates to the campaign of the
    other candidate in the election. The appearance problems created by
    such a staffing decision were exacerbated here due to the text
    messages expressing political opinions that we discuss later in this
    report. Surely, the FBI's Counterintelligence Division had talented
    agents who were not involved in the Midyear investigation who could
    have fully staffed the Russia investigation. Such a decision also
    would have eliminated the excuse we were

stated that the Russia investigation was a higher priority in October
than reviewing the Weiner laptop. Priestap, in particular, provided
convincing justifications for the prioritization decisions he made in
light of his management responsibilities, including that Comey had
tasked him with overseeing the FBI's multifaceted efforts to protect the
2016 election from foreign interference.

Nevertheless, from an institutional perspective, we found this
explanation unpersuasive and concerning. Strzok and the other Midyear
personnel reassigned to the Russia investigation were not the only
agents in the FBI. Had the FBI considered the Weiner laptop significant,
additional personnel could have been assigned to handle it. Moreover,
not all of the Midyear personnel were assigned to Russia. This was a
staffing choice, not an excuse for inaction.

This is even more evident when contrasted with the attention that the
FBI gave to other activities in connection with the Midyear
investigation during the same period. As detailed in Chapter Eight,
these activities included the preparation of Comey's speech at the FBI's
SAC Conference on October 12---a speech designed to help equip SACs to
"bat down" misinformation about the July 5 declination decision; the
preparation and distribution of detailed talking points to FBI SACs in
mid-October in order, again, "to equip people who are going to be
talking about it anyway with the actual facts and the FBI's actual
perspective on the declination"; and a briefing for retired FBI
agents conducted on October 21 for the purpose of describing the
investigative decisions made during Midyear so as to arm former
employees with facts so that they, too, might counter "falsehoods and
exaggerations." Some of these discretionary activities required
significant efforts by members of the Midyear team. Moreover, some of
the claims made in those talking points and presentations concerning the
thoroughness of the investigation were at odds with the approach that
these Midyear team members were taking with regard to the Weiner laptop.

In assessing the decision to prioritize the Russia investigation over
following up on the Midyear-related investigative lead discovered on the
Weiner laptop, we considered the text messages that Strzok exchanged
with Page expressing hostility for then candidate Trump and preference
for a Clinton victory. We were particularly concerned about text
messages sent by Strzok and Page that potentially indicated or created
the appearance that investigative decisions they made were impacted by
bias or improper considerations. Most of the text messages raising such
questions pertained to the Russia investigation, and the implication in
some of these text messages, particularly Strzok's August 8 text message
("we'll stop" candidate Trump from being elected), was that Strzok might
be willing to take official action to impact a presidential candidate's
electoral prospects. Under these circumstances, we did not have
confidence that Strzok's decision to prioritize the Russia investigation
over following up on the Midyear-related investigative lead discovered
on the Weiner laptop was free from bias.

given here about the Russia investigation impacting the ability of
agents to address the Weiner laptop issue.

We searched for evidence that the Weiner laptop was deliberately placed
on the back-burner by others in the FBI to protect Clinton, but found no
evidence in emails, text messages, instant messages, or documents that
suggested an improper purpose. We also took note of the fact that
numerous other FBI executives---including the approximately 39 who
participated in the September 28

SVTC---were briefed on the potential existence of Midyear-related emails
on the Weiner laptop. We also noted that the Russia investigation was
under the supervision of Priestap---for whom we found no evidence of
bias and who himself was aware of the Weiner laptop issue by September
29. However, we also did not identify a consistent or persuasive
explanation for the FBI's failure to act for almost a month after
learning of potential Midyear-related emails on the Weiner laptop.

In sum, we concluded that the explanations given for the failure of the
FBI to take action on the Weiner laptop between September 29 and the end
of October were unpersuasive. The FBI had all the information it needed
on September 29 to obtain the search warrant that it did not seek until
more than a month later. The FBI's neglect had potentially far-reaching
consequences. Comey told the OIG that, had he known about the laptop in
the beginning of October and thought the email review could have been
completed before the election, it may have affected his decision to
notify Congress. Comey told the OIG, "I don't know if it would have
put us in a different place, but I would have wanted to have the
opportunity."

**B. Decision to Seek Search Warrant on October 27**

Several FBI witnesses told us that the reason the FBI decided to seek a
search warrant on October 27 was because the Midyear team learned
important new information about the contents of the Weiner laptop at
around that time. We concluded, however, that this decision resulted not
from the discovery of dramatic new information about the Weiner laptop,
but rather as a result of inquiries from the Weiner case agent and
prosecutors from the U.S. Attorney's Office for SDNY on October 21.

We begin by noting that every fact that would ultimately be included in
the October 30 search warrant that the Midyear team obtained to review
the Weiner laptop was known to the FBI in late September. As we discuss
in Chapter Eleven, the October 30 search warrant included limited
factual information about what the Weiner case agent had seen during his
review of the laptop. The search warrant stated that the FBI had
"information indicating that there are thousands of Abedin's emails on
the Weiner laptop -- including emails, during and around Abedin's
tenure at the State Department, from Abedin's \@clintonemail.com account
as well as a Yahoo! Account appearing to belong to Abedin." As detailed
above, these facts were not only known to FBI NYO, but had been
communicated to FBI Headquarters and FBI Midyear personnel on multiple
occasions in late September.

Moreover, the information known to the Midyear team on October 27 when
it briefed Comey about the laptop was substantially similar to the
information that

NYO had made known to FBI leadership and the FBI Midyear team on
September 28 and 29. This information is summarized in the bullet points
in the prior section.

There was a conference call on October 26 between NYO and the FBI
Midyear team which involved some participants who had not participated
in the September 29 conference call, including Strzok and the Weiner
case agent. However, apart from an update on the total number of emails
on the laptop, we found no evidence the October 26 call involved the
communication of significantly more specific information about the
nature of the messages on the laptop.

Witnesses, including Comey, cited two pieces of information from the
October 26 call that they described as new and of particular importance
in triggering the decision to reactivate the investigation. The first
involved the total volume of emails on the Weiner laptop.
Contemporaneous notes show that during the September 29 call NYO
reported that there were approximately 350,000 emails on the Weiner
laptop, that these included emails between Huma Abedin and former
Secretary Clinton using various Clinton-related domain names, and that
the laptop was still being processed. On the October 26 call, NYO
reported approximately 675,000 emails were on the laptop. We found that
the increased volume of emails on the Weiner laptop---from 350,000 to
675,000---to have little or no significance in the absence of additional
information about the content or metadata of the emails.

The second piece of new information cited by witnesses was the presence
of BlackBerry backups on the laptop. However, this information was not
new. One of the first messages the Weiner case agent saw on the laptop
in late September was a BlackBerry message between Clinton and Abedin.
And the Midyear SSA told us that the presence of BlackBerry information
on the laptop was mentioned during the September 29 call between Midyear
and NYO personnel.

While Comey and other witnesses gave much significance to the BlackBerry
data (the former describing them as the "golden emails"), very little
specific information was known about those messages as of October 27. No
specific information had been developed or provided regarding the volume
or date range of the BlackBerry data. We found no evidence that NYO
provided any more specific information about the BlackBerry data in late
October than they had previously provided in late September. Indeed,
this seems even more apparent given the fact that NYO was legally
prohibited under the scope of the Weiner search warrant from reviewing
any information unrelated to their child exploitation investigation.

We found that what changed between September 29 and October 27 that
finally prompted the FBI to take action was not new information about
what was on the Weiner laptop but rather the inquiries from the SDNY
prosecutors and then from the Department. The only thing of significance
that had changed was the calendar and the fact that people outside of
the FBI were inquiring about the status of the Weiner laptop.

**PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY**

BLANK
=====

**CHAPTER TEN: THE DECISION TO NOTIFY CONGRESS ON OCTOBER 28**

In this Chapter we address Comey's decision to send a letter to Congress
on October 28, 2016, about the emails discovered on the Weiner laptop.
Comey made the decision to send the letter on October 27, following the
briefing he received from the Midyear team that morning.

In Section I of this Chapter, we address various factors that Comey and
others in the FBI said they considered with respect to the decision to
make the disclosure. In Section II we compare the decision to notify
Congress about the Midyear investigation with the way in which the
Russia and Clinton Foundation investigations were handled. In Section
III we discuss certain internal FBI messages about the decision that we
discovered in the course of our review. In Section IV we address the
process by which the FBI announced Comey's decision to the Department
and how Department leadership reacted to his decision. In Section V we
discuss how the October 28 letter was drafted, edited, and finalized. In
Section VI we provide our analysis of Comey's decision.

**I. Factors Considered as Part of Comey's Decision to Notify Congress**

The question of whether to notify Congress of the Midyear team's
discovery of emails on the Weiner laptop was first raised during the
briefing to Comey on the morning of October 27. FBI personnel involved
in the decision told us that over the next 24 hours, numerous
discussions occurred about whether to notify Congress of this
development. Below we address the various factors relevant to this
decision that Comey and others in the FBI told us they considered.

A.  **Belief That Failure to Disclose Would Be an Act of Concealment**

Two broad categories of longstanding Department and FBI policies, norms,
and practices were potentially relevant to the decision to announce the
reactivation of Midyear. First, the Department and the FBI regularly
decline to comment publicly or to Congress regarding ongoing criminal
investigative activity. Comey endorsed this principle in general,
stating, "I believe very strongly that our rule should be, we don't
comment on pending investigations."

Second, the Department has a longstanding practice of avoiding actions
that could impact an imminent election, which Comey described as a "very
important norm." Comey stated:

I said to the team here's the way I think about it. I've lived my
entire career in the Department of Justice under the norm, the
principle, that we, if at all possible, avoid taking any action in the
run up to an election, avoid taking any action that could have some
impact, even if unknown, on an election whether that's a dogcatcher
election or president of the United States..

Comey told us that the circumstances surrounding the discovery of emails
on the Weiner laptop did not permit him to conform to these policies and
norms, and that, in particular, remaining silent did not appear to be an
option. Comey explained:

I couldn't see a door---I said to the people inside the organization---I
can't see a door labeled, no action here. I can only see two doors and
both were actions. One is speak, the other is conceal. Because having
testified about this multiple, multiple times, like working backwards in
September, July and having spoken about it on July 5th, and told
Congress, the American people, a material fact which is, this is done
and there is no there there. To now restart and not just in a marginal
way, in a way where we may have found the missing emails, that to not
speak about that would be, in my view, an affirmative act of
concealment. And so I said okay, those are the doors. One says speak,
the other says conceal. Let's see what's behind the speak door. It's
really bad. We're 11 days from a presidential election. Given the norm
I've long operated under, that's really bad. That will bring such a
storm. Okay, close that one, really bad. Open the second one.
Catastrophic. And again this is something reasonable people can disagree
about, but my view was to conceal at that point given all I had said
would be catastrophic. Not just to the Bureau, but beyond the Bureau and
that as between catastrophic and really bad, that's actually not that
hard a choice. I'll take really bad over catastrophic any day. And so I
said to the team, welcome to the world of really bad.

Comey testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee on May 3, 2017,
and spoke at length about the Midyear investigation. When talking about
the October 28 letter, Comey testified:

When the Anthony Weiner thing landed on me on October 27 and there
was a huge---this is what people forget---new step to be taken, we may
be finding the golden missing emails that would change this case. If I
were not to speak about that, it would be a disastrous, catastrophic
concealment.

A.  **Perceived Obligation to Update Congress**

Comey told us that he felt he had an obligation to update Congress that
the FBI was seeking a search warrant for the Weiner laptop in the
Midyear investigation because the email discovery was potentially very
significant and that made Comey's prior testimony no longer true. Comey
stated:

I don't think the obligation was rooted in my having promised to come
back to them if I learned new evidence. I have read some of that in the
open source; people saying the reason he did it is he had made a promise
to Congress that he would supplement the record. No. I mean maybe I did
in some form, but that's not how I thought about it.

I thought my obligation to Congress is---I testified under oath for 10
hours and said there's no there there; we're done.. And now that is
materially untrue and that's the obligation I felt.

Comey stated that his July 5 statement was "actually irrelevant" to this
obligation. Comey told us that the Department could never have closed
the Midyear

investigation with a "no comment." Instead, he said that, in the absence
of his July 5 statement, the Department would have had to state that it
conducted a "fair, honest, and independent" investigation and that the
investigation was now closed. Comey stated that once that statement was
made---in whatever form it came---"the decision that came in October
was inevitable because all of a sudden that's not true."

In his testimony to the Senate Judiciary Committee, Comey stated, "I've
got to tell Congress that we're restarting this, not in some frivolous
way, in a hugely significant way." Comey added that "everyone on my team
agreed we have to tell

Congress that we are restarting this in a hugely significant way."

Comey added that the significance of the potential evidence on the
Weiner laptop was a factor in assessing his obligation to notify
Congress and the public. He stated:

Yeah, so I'm sitting there. It's October 27th and there's a reasonable
likelihood that we are going to find material---one possibility---that
will change our view of the Hillary Clinton case. Two, even if it
doesn't, that we know something that is materially different than what
the rest of the world knows and has relied upon since I spoke about
this.. The FBI is done. There is no there there and that to conceal
that, in my view, would be---subject the FBI and the Justice Department,
frankly more broadly.to a corrosive doubt that you had engineered a
cover up to protect a particular political candidate. And that
especially given your pledges of transparency, not---I don't actually
put much stock in the notion that I promised to get back to Congress,
but that I had said to everybody, the credibility of the Justice
enterprise is enhanced by maximal credibility, maximal transparency. I
offer that transparency, and then I know something that materially
changes that picture and I hide it, I think the results would be
generations-long damage to the credibility of the FBI and the Justice
Department. That's what I think about it.

Comey told us to put aside any hindsight bias about what was actually
found on the laptop and "sit with me on October 28th and make this
decision. And where you have a reasonable prospect of something that is
world changing with respect to that investigation, then decide whether
you speak about it or not.\" Comey emphasized that this was "not just
any investigative step, again you have reason to believe that there are
hundreds of thousands of germane emails, including which is a very
important fact to me, potentially the missing BlackBerry.emails from
early in her tenure." He continued, "So this isn't a frolic and
detour, this is, it's the reason the Department thought we had to get a
search warrant, there's potentially highly significant information
there."

We asked other FBI personnel about the nature of this obligation to
update Congress. Rybicki told us that Comey felt he had an obligation
"to basically supplement the record" with Congress because he had
testified that the investigation was complete. Bowdich told us that he
thought the obligation grew out of Comey's July 5 press conference.
Bowdich stated, "The Director felt like, hey, if we don't notify them,
after the July 5th notification, we could potentially be accused of
concealing information. I remember him using that, that word."

Steinbach described Comey's decision and his obligation by stating:

The overriding question was say nothing and get accused, worst case
scenario, of covering up. Or be transparent and say we have something,
we just don't know what it is, and let that course play out. And I, you
know, again, I, I describe the Director as a very transparent,
communicative.person. And I want to say that that transparent piece
probably weighed on him more than the not saying anything piece. And
also I think his, his belief that he had somehow made that pledge to
Congress.

The Lead Analyst stated that at one of the meetings during this period,
Comey asked everyone in the room their opinion on whether the FBI had an
obligation to notify Congress. When it was his turn, the Lead Analyst
told us:

I will never forget what I told him. I said, sir, every instinct in my
body tells me we shouldn't do it, but I understand your argument that
you have to make a, a factual representation, a factual correction to
Congress to amend essentially what you told them, that otherwise,
because I think that was really where he had coalesced or the discussion
had, that he had made this statement to Congress, and that doing things
like serving process is contrary to what he had told Congress. So he
felt like he had to correct that record.

FBI Attorney 1 told us that an OGC attorney was tasked with researching
whether Comey had a legal obligation to correct the record with
Congress. FBI Attorney 1 stated, "I think what we decided was that he
did not make a promise to come back to them. But that the
implication was that the investigation was over." We asked FBI Attorney
1 to explain her understanding of Comey's obligation. She stated:

I think Baker and the Director just believed that, yes.the letter
of what he said did not say I will come back to you. But they believed
that he had an obligation to do so under.just general standards of
candor.that we had finished the investigation. It was not
finished.. I just think he felt that what he had said, the impression
he had left, because he was the one testifying, was that he would come
back to them. And Baker thought that, and Baker agreed with that
part, definitely.

Baker told us that he believed that he was the person who first raised
the issue of Comey's obligation to update Congress. Baker stated that
this obligation arose because Comey had "told Congress repeatedly this
thing is closed" and had now authorized "a significant step forward in
the investigation." Baker stated that this obligation had nothing to do
with the July 5 statement and was instead related to Comey's testimony
to Congress. Baker stated that even if Comey had not done the July 5
statement, eventually "Comey would have had to go to Congress, talk
about the FBI's investigation, talk about our conclusions. Say that we
agreed or disagreed with the Department's decision. And then, having
done that, he would have been in the soup in the same way at the end of
October." Baker told the OIG that he believed that the perceived need to
notify Congress was the overriding factor that drove the decisionmaking.

Anderson told us that she believed Comey needed to supplement his
testimony to Congress because it "was such a significant issue" that "it
would have been misleading by omission." Anderson stated that even
though Comey did not explicitly tell Congress he would update them, it
was "implied" in "his testimony overall."

**C. Avoiding the Perception that the FBI Concealed the New Information
to Help Clinton Win the Election**

Comey told us that he was concerned that if the FBI failed to disclose
the new information, it could be accused of attempting to help Clinton
get elected. He stated that "to conceal that, in my view, would
be---subject the FBI and the Justice Department, frankly more
broadly.to a corrosive doubt that you had engineered a cover up to
protect a particular political candidate."

Baker also expressed this concern. He stated:

Not to notify Congress is.an action because it also potentially
could have an impact on the election.so for example, imagine we
don't say anything. We push past the election, and then we announce
that, well, by the way, we've authorized a search warrant, and we found
all these emails. Let's imagine, right? Because we don't know what the
facts are.

We find all these emails. You guys have probably heard this story, but
I'll just say it again. And it turns out that, oh, my God, there were
more classified emails of a different type, or there's clear evidence
that she knew what she was doing. It kind of pushes us from the probable
cause thing up to the beyond a reasonable doubt. And now we're going to
change our view about charging her.. If she's been elected president
of the United States, then Donald Trump would say, oh my God, these
people knew this beforehand and didn't say anything. This is a rigged
system. This is, this, these people intentionally hid that until after
the election so that they could get her elected and, and thwart me.

Steinbach also stated a similar concern. He stated:

I think weighing on everyone's mind is if, if we get through this and a
week after the general election we find relevant material, the Congress
and the American public will never allow the FBI to live that down. You
clearly hid this from the American public. And you knew you had
something, yet you waited until after, until after she became president
before you disclosed that you found something relevant. That was one
course of action. The other course of action is we, we state it and get
accused of influencing the election beforehand.

Steinbach continued:

We felt that, again, the, the Congress, the American people, would never
be able to say FBI, you withheld this. The last thing we wanted to have
happen was, hey, I wouldn't have voted for her if I had known this. And
so that was weighing on our minds. We wanted there to be transparency,
both in November as well as in, in July. Hey, here is the set of facts.
Here is the good and the bad. You, and again, I think that's, there's
somebody, many feel that's not your job, but I think the discussion
items were, lay out the facts and let people decide for themselves. And
that, and maybe not in those exact words, that was a theme through the
course of this.

Steinbach told us he did not recall if Comey "said it in exactly these
words, but, in the totality, that's what he conveyed to us." Steinbach
added that Comey "wanted to be transparent."

**1. Protecting the Reputation of the FBI**

Several witnesses articulated a concern that failing to disclose the
decision to seek the search warrant would injure the reputation of the
FBI---a concern that, as discussed above, was closely related to
avoiding the perception that the FBI was hiding the information to help
Clinton.

Bowdich stated, "I know Comey really felt hung out there with
Congress, and he was so worried about the institution getting hurt. He
didn't, he knew it was a bad situation. But the institution getting hurt
by thoughts of us concealing this information."

FBI Attorney 1 told us that the team "certainly considered" what would
happen if the FBI chose not to disclose this information to Congress and
the information became known after the election. She stated that would
have had "a much more significant impact on the reputation of the FBI"
because the FBI would have been accused of "somehow hiding" that
information from Congress. We pointed out to FBI Attorney 1 that the
FBI's standard practice is not to release information on investigations
and asked her if not sending the letter would have simply been
consistent with standard practice. She responded:

It would be, except we had already released information. And that's what
I said about, maybe I would have done something differently on the July
5th statement. We had already released all of the information and
said this is what we're doing. This is what we've decided. And then to
then go back to the same stuff and.leave everybody with the
impression that that's what we've decided, and then a week later,
everybody finds out that we, we had reopened this investigation. I think
that would have been much more detrimental. To the FBI's reputation and
to the, the Justice Department's reputation.

**2. Protecting the Legitimacy of a Clinton Presidency**

Comey told us that he was concerned about the perceived illegitimacy of
a Clinton presidency that would follow from a failure to make the
October 28 disclosure. Comey stated:

I don't remember thinking this explicitly, but I'm sure I was operating
in an environment where she was going to be the next president, and I
was in a position to have her be an illegitimate president the moment
she was elected because I would have concealed a material development in
her investigation. And the moment she took office, the FBI is dead, the
Department of Justice is dead and she's dead as president..

FBI Attorney 1 expressed similar concerns to us, but said she did not
express them at the time. FBI Attorney 1 stated:

I also think it would have been detrimental.. I was careful not to
discuss this. But in my mind, it was detrimental.if Secretary Clinton
was elected president, then.it would have come out. It would have
definitely come out that we had done the search warrant. And then, then
it would have been an illegitimate, like it would have been grounds for,
you know, you couldn't have elected her. She was under investigation.
All of those sorts of things that would have.had more of an impact if
you didn't say anything.

**D. Concerns about the Electoral Impact of the Announcement**

Comey told us that he decided at the time that he would not consider who
would be helped or hurt by making public the reactivation of the Midyear
investigation. Comey stated:

I will not engage in the exercise of figuring out who will be helped/who
will be hurt, which way this will cut, who will play it, because then
I'm starting to make judgments based on a political calculation.
Instead, I should think about what is the right thing to do given the
circumstance which we find ourselves. Where I've.made material
representations and what is the best thing for the Justice institution
to do given that, without regard to what may happen, so consciously I
did not.

Comey described the debate within the FBI about the congressional
notification as a "family conversation," where everyone was free to
state their opinions and concerns. Comey specifically told us of a
concern expressed by Anderson during this conversation. Comey stated:

One important part of the family conversation about whether to send
the October 28th letter was Jim Baker knew from his conversations with
Trisha Anderson that one of her concerns was how should we think about
the fact that this might hurt Hillary Clinton and help elect another
candidate, that kind of thing, and Baker said we should raise it with
the Director and that's the kind of stuff he wants you to raise and I
gather he thought she might not raise it. So at our next family
discussion that evening, he said let me ask you a contrarian question.
You know how do you think about this? And then I think she spoke herself
and said, how do you think about the fact that you might be helping
elect Donald Trump? And I said, I cannot consider that at all. Down that
path lies the death of the FBI because if I ever start thinking about
whose political ox will be gored by this or that, who will be hurt or
helped, then we are done as an independent force in American life and so
I appreciate you raising it, I cannot consider it. And I was very glad
she raised it because it was probably a question that was looming in
lots of people's minds and I think my answer was the right answer..

Anderson stated that she did not remember exactly what she articulated
in the discussions about the letter, but she told us that she had a
conversation with Baker prior to the final meeting with Comey on the
morning of October 28. Anderson stated:

I do remember saying more explicitly to Jim Baker that I was worried
that what we were doing was going to have an impact on the election. Was
that appropriate for the Bureau? Was that, you know, did, I was
concerned about that for, you know, for us as a, as an institution. And,
and at least that that was how we were going to be perceived. The FBI
was going to be perceived as having impacted the outcome of the
election. And, you know, and sort of tied to that.had we reached the
threshold, you know, that it was essential that we send this letter? And
this is where, you know my, you know, my concerns about materiality and
sort of fairness to the former Secretary, you know, played in. You know,
in light of the fact that we're going to be perceived to be affecting
the outcome of the election, is there really enough here to warrant us
doing that?

Anderson stated that Baker first raised Anderson's concerns to Comey
during the October 28 morning meeting and "kind of put Anderson on
the hot seat." Anderson stated that she articulated her views to Comey
and told him, "I'm not so certain that this is the right thing to do."
Anderson told us that a robust discussion ensued. Anderson stated that
she did not recall either candidate being mentioned by name in this
discussion and said any discussion of impact on the election "certainly
would not have been couched in terms of" helping or hurting either
candidate. Anderson added that "it would have been highly inappropriate
for there to be any partisan you know, motive or interest in influencing
the outcome of the election." Anderson stated, "I don't know that I
walked away from the meeting feeling, you know, totally convinced that
it was the right thing to do, but I also understood why the other
options were worse."

After reviewing a draft of this report, Anderson clarified her testimony
to the OIG. Anderson added:

While I do not remember the specific words that I used, I recall very
clearly that I did not couch my concerns in terms of the FBI\'s actions
helping or hurting any particular presidential candidate. Rather, I
asked Comey whether we should take into account that sending the
letter might have an impact on the outcome of the election, or could be
perceived as having such an impact. I stated that I had concerns about
our actions having such an impact particularly given that it was
unclear---and perhaps even unlikely---that the emails would be material
to the investigation. I also recall raising a concern about it being
unfair to the former Secretary---in a sort of due process sense---
because no matter how carefully we wrote such a letter, the importance
of the emails would be overinflated and misunderstood. So, in my mind,
and what I believe I argued in the meeting, was that we were about to do
something that could have a very significant impact on the outside world
even though what we had might not be material, yet people would very
likely view it as such.

We asked Baker about Anderson's concerns. Baker told us that Anderson
came to him the morning of October 28 and stated:

I've thought about this overnight. I have serious reservations about
going down this road. I'm very concerned about this, Jim. Why? Well,
because I'm concerned that we are going to interject ourselves into this
process. We're going to interject ourselves into the election in a way
that's, that potentially or almost certainly will change the outcome.
And I am, I, Trisha, am quite concerned about that. And I'm concerned
about us being responsible for getting Donald Trump elected.

Baker stated that Anderson was worried about "putting the thumb on the
scale" in a way that is "going to hurt one candidate and benefit another
one right before the election." Baker told us that he asked Anderson if
she wanted to bring this up with Comey, but Baker stated that "she was
reticent" to do so. Baker said that he brought the issue up with Comey
during the meeting that morning in order to make sure Anderson's concern
was brought to Comey's attention without attributing it to her. Baker
stated that Anderson then "chimed in" and "elaborated" on her concerns
once he raised the issue. Baker told us that Comey responded "along
the lines of like we can't think that way. We just can't think that
way."

FBI Attorney 1 told us that she recalled others expressing "concern
about what impact this would have on the election." Specifically, FBI
Attorney 1 stated that she spoke directly with Anderson about these
concerns, which they both shared. She said that Anderson spoke to Baker
about this concern and Baker raised it at one of the group meetings. FBI
Attorney 1 stated:

As I was going through this, I was thinking I should not be bringing
politics into this. And so I was trying to be careful about thinking
about this in an apolitical way and not raising the concern as who is
going to get elected, because that actually is not something that I
thought we should be considering as the Bureau. I brought that up with
Trisha, because she and I, you know, we're close and we talked about it.
But I did not, no one, I don't think anyone brought up the outcome on
the election. We talked about the policy, about, you know, that, making
announcements so close in time to the election. But we didn't bring up
the fact that if you do this, Trump will get elected sort of question,
because I, I don't know that anyone thought it was appropriate to bring
that up.

FBI Attorney 1 told us that this issue was raised with Comey in the
context of having an undue influence on the election, rather the
potential impact of the decision in an electoral sense. FBI Attorney 1
stated that Comey recognized the concern, but Comey framed the issue in
terms of "what was our obligation.to Congress and to the people to do
the right thing." FBI Attorney 1 reiterated that although the issue was
discussed in terms of the proximity to the election, "we did not
discuss, but if you say this, then Trump will get elected. Like, we did
not in any way talk about it in those stark of terms. And so at least
not in the, you know, as the group decision."

We asked other participants in the discussion about Anderson's comments.
Rybicki stated that Anderson raised a concern that the notification to
Congress "could help elect candidate Trump at that point." Strzok told
us that someone commented that the letter "might influence the ultimate
outcome of the election." Bowdich stated that Anderson made an argument
against the letter, but he told us that he could not recall what that
argument was.

**E. Expectation that Clinton Would Be Elected President**

Comey told us that "like the rest of the world he assumed that
Hillary Clinton was going to be elected president." When asked whether
this had an impact in his decision to notify Congress, he stated:

I think none and I tried very hard to both be that and maybe convinced
myself of that.. I've often asked myself, so were you influenced in
any way by the knowledge what the polls were showing? Not consciously,
and in fact I tried to be very conscious about saying I don't give a
rip. I don't care. But you know if anything, I suppose like if it's
unconscious, I may have been consoled that it wasn't going to make any
difference anyway. I don't remember thinking that consciously, but the
environment which I was operating---well I don't want to psychoanalyze
myself too much more---not consciously is the honest answer.

When asked if his decision would have been the same if Clinton was
expected to lose by 20 points, he stated:

That's a reasonable question.. I think I would have said still,
if you conceal something, maybe the matter wouldn't have been of such
intense interest if she was down 20 points all summer long or something.
But a matter of intense public interest and debate that and people have
relied upon your credible investigation and your word here, even if it
was foreordained that she was going to lose the election, I think to
hide that would have subjected this institution to justifiable withering
criticism.

In a subsequent OIG interview, Comey stated: "I am sure I was influenced
by the tacit assumption that Hillary Clinton was sure to be the next
President."

We asked Baker if anyone raised the issue of Clinton being up in the
polls and likely to win the election no matter what the FBI did. Baker
said that this issue "definitely came up" and "somebody said something
along those lines." Baker

stated:

There was some discussion about if she, if we do this and she wins, then
nobody can allege that it was a rigged system and things had been hidden
to try to benefit her. Somebody may have said in that context, well,
she's ahead in the polls anyway and that's probably what's going to
happen, and, and so on. So I think, yes, I think that aspect of it came
up in that way. But it was more like, you know, if we do this and she
gets elected, then she should be thanking us.

Baker told us that he could not remember who made this comment and
added, "It could have been the Director, but I don't specifically
remember."

**F. Belief that Email Review Could Not Be Completed Before the
Election**

Each of the participants in the FBI discussions to seek the search
warrant told us that no one expected the review of the Weiner laptop to
be completed prior to the election. Comey told us that this fact---that
the Midyear team did not expect to finish the review of the Weiner
laptop prior to the election---"was a really important fact for me" in
making the decision whether to make the October 28 announcement.

Comey stated that he asked the Midyear team directly during these
discussions if they could "finish the review before the election." Comey
said that the team told him, "There's absolutely no way we'll get that
done before the election. It will be long after the election." When
asked why he did not just assign 30,000 people to review the laptop,
Comey stated:

Yeah, I could have, but I actually raised this and their answer was, the
review has to be done by people that understand the context. If we bring
in a class out of Quantico it doesn't do us any good because the quality
of the work will be such that we can't rely on. It's not like searching
a field for a bullet fragment.we have to put eyes on them to
understand this.

We asked Comey if his decision to notify Congress would have been
different if the team told him they could finish the review prior to the
election. Comey stated:

Maybe, yeah. If they could tell me with you know high confidence that
this is something we can knock out in a week, maybe, yeah, maybe. But I
do think it was an important consideration that we're about to undertake
something of indefinite duration and so I think---maybe---I'm not
certain that would make it differently, but I would have waited probably
differently. If it was October 3rd and they said, we think there may be
something here and we can knock it out in the next six days; I might
have. Then---it's interesting---I hadn't thought about this---but then I
might have been on to considering the prospect of a leak you know
because I might have said, not going to do it, but what would be the
effect on the Department if there's a leak about the search warrant,
yeah.

Comey later added that the ultimate impact on his decision would have
depended "upon how high a confidence read they could give to me that
it'll be finished far enough in advance of the election to responsibly
report a result." Comey reiterated:

If I had known the information or even a reasonable facsimile of the
information that I was given on the 27th, three weeks earlier, I'm
highly confident I would have said, let's get a search warrant and then
we would have had a conversation about how soon can you finish and
whether there was a prospect of finishing this before the election.
I still would have had a very hard decision to make, but I would have
been making it three weeks earlier. I don't know whether it would have
led to a different place---but I certainly would have wanted to have the
option to be there and to consider whether.let's make it up, three
weeks' of time, does that make me think differently about the choice
between speak or conceal? Is there a reasonable prospect I could run
this out and have a conclusion far enough in advance of the election
that if it changes the FBI's view, I could still, well you'd have to go
through all that decision tree. But I don't know it would have put us in
a different place, but I would have wanted to have the opportunity.

**G. Fear that the Information Would Be Leaked**

We asked the FBI personnel involved in these discussions if a fear of
leaks impacted the decision to notify Congress. Comey told us that he
"didn't make this decision because he thought it would leak
otherwise." Comey stated that he thought "that would be a cowardly way
to make a decision." Nevertheless, Comey told us, "I kind of consoled
myself, this was a hard call and you're going to get the crap beat out
of you for it, but it would have come out anyway." He reiterated,
however, "I don't want to leave you with the impression that I sent
the letter to

Congress because I thought it was going to leak otherwise."

Others, however, had a different recollection. Rybicki told us that,
while not remembering the context, he recalled the issue of leaks being
raised during these discussions. Strzok stated that the fear of leaks
played a role in the ultimate decision. Strzok explained that the
decision to seek a search warrant for the Weiner laptop was known to
many people beyond the Midyear team and this raised a concern that the
information could leak. Draft talking points that were circulated to FBI
senior management on October 31 regarding the decision to send the
letter to Congress, which incorporated comments by Strzok, the Lead
Analyst, and Page, included the following bullet point: "It's important
to note the sic I notified Congress *before* moving forward with
additional investigative steps in this investigation, because of my
commitment to transparency and because I wanted Conrgess sic to hear
it from me first." (Emphasis in original). Page told us that her
"personal belief" was that there was "a substantial and legitimate fear
that when we went to seek the warrant in order to get access to the
Weiner laptop, that the fact of that would leak." Page said that this
concern related to the suspicion that NYO personnel had been leaking
negative Clinton Foundation stories. Bowdich, Anderson, and FBI Attorney
1 told us that they did not recall a discussion of leaks during the
debates about notifying Congress.

Baker told us that a concern about leaks played a role in the decision
to send the letter to Congress. Baker stated:

We were quite confident that.somebody is going to leak this fact.
That we have all these emails. That, if we don't put out a letter,
somebody is going to leak it. That definitely was discussed.. If
we don't do a letter. It's either going to be leaked before or after the
election, and we either find something or we don't. And either way,
there's going to be claims that we tried to play games with the
election, and we tried to steer it in a certain way to help Hillary
Clinton and hurt Donald Trump. We're not about that. We don't, we're not
making decisions on the basis of which candidate we like or don't like.
We're not going to do that. And so we are just going to have to ignore
all that and do what, again, what we think is right, consistent with our
obligations to Congress.

Baker told us that "the discussion was somebody in New York will leak
this." Baker continued, "What we discussed was the possibility that
if we go forward with the search warrant and take that step, that's a
step being taken in the Hillary Clinton investigation. And that's what
will leak." Baker explained, "The sense was that that this
significant of a step is not going to go unnoticed. And if we don't put
something out, somebody will leak it. That's just what we talked about."

**II. Comparison to Other Ongoing Investigations**

In this section we address the Russia and Clinton Foundation
investigations, both of which were ongoing in October 2016. Comey and
other witnesses told us that these investigations were not discussed
during deliberations regarding whether to announce to Congress the
reactivation of the Midyear investigation.

**A. The Differential Treatment of the Russia Investigation**

On March 20, 2017, Comey testified before Congress that the FBI began an
investigation in late July 2016 into "the Russian government's efforts
to interfere in the 2016 presidential election," including
"investigating the nature of any links between individuals associated
with the Trump campaign and the Russian government and whether there was
any coordination between the campaign and

Russia's efforts."

Despite the existence of this investigation into individuals associated
with the Trump campaign in the fall of 2016, none of the participants in
the FBI's internal discussions about the October 28 notification to
Congress recalled any mention of the Russia investigation.

We asked Comey whether the existence of investigations into individuals
affiliated with the Trump campaign impacted his consideration as to
whether to send the October 28 notification to Congress regarding
Clinton. Comey told us that "you've got to look at each case
individually" and stated that comparing those investigations is "a
calculation you shouldn't engage in because then you're starting to
weigh political impacts of your work---who's hurt by this, who's hurt by
that." Comey explained:

Well I don't think---I shouldn't think of them in relation to each
other. I should look at a case involving a John Smith and given our
norms and rules around that, I don't see and I don't think the
Department sees, a reason for treating those cases as exceptions the way
we did the Hillary Clinton case. In part, among the considerations
in the Hillary Clinton case, the whole world knew we were doing it,
right? The candidate and her campaign themselves had talked about the
review, the security inquiry. We know the government is working on this.
The referral had been public, so all of that to my mind puts this in a
different position. And counterintelligence investigations are very
different---and for all reasons you can imagine, we are very, very
careful about---because we don't want the adversary who's not
necessarily the subject, but is the nation-state to know what we're
doing or who we may have thought of to focus on, so there it would take
even more to be the exception to the rule as I just look at---I wouldn't
look at them in relation to each other, but if I found another case
where I and the Department thought that made sense to make an exception,
we would.

Comey was asked during testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee
on May 3, 2017, if it was "appropriate" for Comey to comment on the
Midyear investigation repeatedly and "not say anything" about the
investigation involving "the Trump campaign's connections to" Russia.
Comey replied, "I think I treated both investigations consistently under
the same principles. People forget that we would not confirm the
existence of the Hillary Clinton email investigation until three months
after it began, even though it began with a public referral and the
candidate herself talked about it."

Whether to make the public aware of the more general issue of Russian
interference in the U.S. presidential election also arose in the fall of
2016. On October 6, the Department of Homeland Security and Office of
the Director of National Intelligence issued a joint statement about
election security. This statement was not drafted in connection with the
FBI's Russia investigation, but Comey's reaction to it is highly
relevant. The statement began, "The U.S. Intelligence Community (USIC)
is confident that the Russian Government directed the recent compromises
of emails from US persons and institutions, including from US political
organizations." The statement then described the nature of these
compromises and urged "state and local election officials to be
vigilant."

As a member of the USIC, the FBI was consulted on this statement. Comey
told us that he decided the FBI should not be included in the statement
because he felt that it conflicted with the longstanding Department of
Justice norm "that we, if at all possible, avoid taking any action in
the run up to an election, avoid taking any action that could have some
impact, even if unknown, on an election." Comey continued:

It was actually that norm that drove me to say the FBI should not be
putting out a statement earlier in October about the Russian hacking,
that I had advocated inside the U.S. government. In fact, I drafted an
op-ed from my own name in August to call out the Russians, to say here's
what they are doing in our election. And our awesome interagency system,
kicked that around, kicked that around, and then come October, there is
then discussion about making a public statement about the Russians. And
I said my view is.that the goal of a public statement is to inoculate
the American people against what the Russians are doing. I think the
inoculate goals have been by and large achieved because of all the press
reporting on it. You had legislators talking about it. I said so there's
only a marginal increase in the inoculation by an official statement
from the FBI. And given that we are now a month from a presidential
election---from an election, I think we can reasonably avoid that
action.. And so I said, I don't think the FBI should put out such a
statement; it's too late. That if we need to do it, we should have done
it then and I said that's just how I've long operated.

In an October 5, 2016 email, Comey explained his position on the
statement to Central Intelligence Agency Director John Brennan and
Director of National Intelligence James Clapper. Comey stated, in part:

I think the window has closed on the opportunity for an official
statement, with 4 weeks until a presidential election. I think the
marginal incremental disruption/inoculation impact of the statement
would be hugely outweighed by the damage to the Intelligence
Community's reputation for independence.

I could be wrong (and frequently am) but Americans already "know" the
Russians are monkeying around on behalf of one candidate. Our
"confirming" it (1) adds little to the public mix, (2) begs difficult
questions about both how we know that and what we are going to do about
it, and (3) exposes us to serious accusations of launching our own
"October surprise." That last bit is utterly untrue, but a reality in
our poisonous atmosphere.

**B. The Differential Treatment of the Clinton Foundation
Investigation**

In 2016, the FBI had an open investigation into the Clinton Foundation.
Comey refused to confirm the existence of the investigation on July 7,
2016, in testimony before the House Oversight and Government Reform
Committee because the investigation was not public.

In addition, numerous witnesses told us that agents involved in the
Clinton Foundation investigation were instructed to take no overt
investigative steps prior to the election. We asked Yates about this
instruction. Yates stated, "Yeah, I think there was discussion about
look, if agents on the Clinton Foundation investigation want to go
do record stuff and stuff that you can do covertly, fine. But not
overtly.. And the sort of thought being we'll address that again at
the end after the election was over." Yates explained that this
instruction was explicit because the Department does "everything it
can to avoid having an impact on an election." Yates continued:

You have to be cognizant of the fact that the actions that we take
at DOJ can have an unintended impact on an election. And so that you do
everything you can to avoid that.. Like if somebody wants to send you
a criminal referral we generally don't initiate an investigation until
after the election.. So it's, you know, sort of basic DOJ practice
that I don't think anybody would dispute that you do everything you can
to avoid having an impact on an election..

And the Bureau never pushed back on that concept. This actually came up
with, in the connection with Paul Manafort. And they had an
investigation on Manafort and I had a lengthy discussion with
McCabe, at least one, maybe more, about how important it was at that
time that our investigation not be overt. And what they were, what the
Bureau was doing with respect to Manafort because that could impact
Trump even though he was no longer his campaign manager. That unless
there was something they really needed to do, because they were getting
records and doing that kind of, unless there was something they needed,
really needed to do overt they really needed to stay under the radar
screen.. Because it's not fair to impact an election.

Axelrod echoed this point, stating that "DOJ's policy, procedure, and
tradition" is to avoid overt investigative steps in "the run up to
an election." Axelrod continued, "And this policy had actually
been cited to the Bureau on other investigations during this election
cycle," including the Clinton Foundation and Manafort investigations.

We asked Comey about the different instructions given to the Midyear
investigation and the Clinton Foundation investigation. Comey told us,
"The principle is take no action if it can reasonably be avoided and
there was nothing about the Clinton Foundation investigation that was
time sensitive." Comey continued:

The challenge of the discovery of the emails on the Weiner thing was,
given the context that we had told the world, we the Justice Department
and the FBI, that there was nothing there.to now be presented with
all these emails that are.highly significant to that investigation,
how is, where is the door labeled no action, that you either speak or
you conceal. And so either one's an action, so which action should we
take. So it was very different, given the context, a very different
posture than the Clinton Foundation. And my worry was, I have to be
careful that people in New York aren't by virtue of political
enthusiasm, trying to take action that will generate noise that will
have an impact on the election. No time sensitivity whatsoever to
that..

**III. Internal FBI Discussions Regarding the Decision to Notify
Congress**

**A. McCabe, Strzok, and Page Text Messages on October 27**

We reviewed text messages from Strzok, Page, and McCabe that indicated
their disagreement with Comey's decision to notify Congress on October
28. At 4:03 p.m. on October 27, Page sent a text message to Strzok that
stated, "Please, let's figure out what it is we HAVE first. What if we
can't make out probable cause? Then we have no further investigative
step." Strzok replied, "Agreed." At 9:57 p.m. on October 27, McCabe sent
a text message to Page that stated, in part, "Baker says his
meetings were mostly about the notification and statement which the boss
wants to send tomorrow. I do not agree with the timing but he is
insistent." Page responded, "Fwiw, I also wildly disagree that we need
to notify before we even know what the plan is. If we can't get in, then
no investigative step has been taken. Whatever. I hope you can get some
rest tonight."

We asked Strzok about his text message exchange with Page. Strzok stated
that there was a "vigorous, healthy debate" within the FBI about whether
the notification to Congress was a good idea and Strzok told us that he
thought the concerns expressed in Page's text message were part of that
debate. Strzok told us that he ultimately agreed with Comey's decision
to send the letter to Congress.

Page told us that she could not remember the context of the text
messages with Strzok. Page agreed with the content of the message and
stated that she did not support Comey's decision to notify Congress.
Page added, "We just didn't know what we had yet. It just felt premature
to me." Page also stated that there was "no guarantee" that the FBI
would be able to make out probable cause for the search warrant and she
felt it was "presumptuous of us to sort of say we're reopening and we're
doing this before we have even a search warrant in hand." However, Page
told us that she was not involved in the discussions about the letter
due to McCabe's recusal.^[^167^](#fn167){#fnref167 .footnote-ref}^

We asked McCabe about this text message exchange with Page. McCabe
stated that Baker told him during a phone call that Comey planned to
send a letter to Congress. McCabe told us that from his perspective---as
someone who had not participated in the discussions about the
letter---"it just seemed like we should have a better understanding of
what we had before we made a notification."

We also showed these text messages to Comey. Comey stated he did not
recall discussing the issue of congressional notification with McCabe.
Comey told us that he did not remember hearing Page express these
concerns during the debate over the letter, adding, "I think I would
remember that."

**B. Strzok Call with Midyear SSA, Agent 1, and Agent 2 on October 28**

At 5:21 a.m. on October 28, Page sent a text message to Strzok that
stated, "Any plan to tell the case agents? You know, since so much of
this has hinged on the credibility of 'the team.' 😡." At 5:59 a.m.,
Strzok sent an email to the Midyear SSA and Agents 1 and 2, stating,
"Would like to talk to the three of you on a conference call at 645.
Sorry for late notice."

Strzok stated that he reached out to the agents and the SSA on his own
and not at Comey's suggestion. Strzok told us that he wanted to make
sure the agents and the SSA knew what was happening and he wanted their
input. Strzok stated:

I think it was, hey look, we went, we briefed Comey. Our sense is
they want us to reopen the case, and we need to get a warrant and go
after it. And they're going to send a letter to Congress. What do you
think about that? Are you, are you good? Are you, objections, are we
horribly off-base? Are we not thinking about something?

The Midyear SSA told us that Strzok called to inform him of Comey's
decision to send the letter and wanted to make sure "the case agents
were informed" as well. The Midyear SSA, Agent 1, and Agent 2 told us
that they each ultimately agreed with the decisions to seek the search
warrant and send the letter. As noted previously, Agent 2 was on the
September 29 phone call with NYO about the Weiner laptop. Agent 2 told
us that around this time was the first he had heard about the Weiner
laptop since September 29.

**C. Agent 1's Instant Messages on October 28**

After the letter was sent by the FBI to Congress on October 28, Agent 1
sent a series of instant messages to other FBI employees about the
reactivation of the Midyear investigation.

Beginning at 1:46 p.m., Agent 1 exchanged the following messages with
Agent 5. The sender of each message is identified after the timestamp.

1:46 p.m., Agent 5: "jesus christ... Trump: Glad FBI is fixing 'horrible
mistake' on clinton emails... for fuck's sake."

1:47 p.m., Agent 5: "the fuck's sake part was me, the rest was Trump."

1:49 p.m., Agent 1: "Not sure if Trump or the fifth floor is worse..."

1:49 p.m., Agent 5: "I'm so sick of both..."

1:50 p.m., Agent 5: "+o( TRUMP"

1:50 p.m., Agent 5: "+o( Fifth floor"

1:50 p.m., Agent 5: "+o( FBI"

1:50 p.m., Agent 5: "+o( Average American public"

We asked both Agent 1 and Agent 5 about these messages. Agent 1 and
Agent 5 both stated the reference to "fifth floor" referred to the
location of the FBI WFO's Counterintelligence Division. Agent 1
continued, "Again, you know, I think a general, general theme in a lot
of this is some personal comment, or, you know, complaining about common
topics and leadership and, and venting." Agent 5 also described this as
general complaining to Agent 1 and also as an example of her being "very
tired of working" these types of cases.

Agent 1 also sent two instant messages about the Weiner laptop to FBI
employees not involved in the Midyear investigation. At 2:16 p.m., Agent
1 messaged, "Yes. Its more email found through a separate matter. Not
sure if they are even unique yet, but we have to make sure." At 2:25
p.m., Agent 1 messaged, "emails found through separate matter. Due
diligence---my best guess---probably uniques, maybe classified uniques,
with none being any different than what we've already seen." We
asked Agent 1 about these instant messages. Agent 1 stated that, as of
October 28, any information he had about the contents of the Weiner
laptop would have come from discussions with the Midyear SSA. Agent 1
told us he did not recall precisely what he meant by these messages, but
that given the seemingly small numbers of Abedin-Clinton emails the
Midyear team had previously found, "I thought there was a chance that we
would see more emails that we hadn't seen before." We asked Agent 1 to
explain his comment about "none being any different than what we've
already seen" and whether that indicated Agent 1 did not expect to find
emails substantively different than what the Midyear team had previously
reviewed. Agent 1 responded, "Maybe. That, right, right. The classified
email was in a similar vein that we saw, similar activities and similar
talking around.

Yeah."

**IV. The FBI Informs DOJ Leadership About Comey's Decision**

Department personnel were informed of Comey's decision to notify
Congress around mid-day on October 27. Various discussions between FBI
and Department personnel occurred over the next 24 hours. These
discussions were at both the Midyear-team level and between Rybicki and
Axelrod. Notably, Comey never spoke directly with either Lynch or Yates
about the notification. We describe these interactions between the
Department and the FBI below.

**A. FBI and DOJ Midyear Team Discussions**

Strzok stated that FBI personnel assigned to Midyear "had a variety of
robust discussions with" Department personnel about the letter to
Congress. One such discussion occurred on October 27 after Comey had
decided that the FBI should seek to review the emails on the Weiner
laptop, and that Congress should be notified. According to Prosecutor
2's notes, Strzok, FBI Attorney 1 and the Midyear

SSA from the FBI, and Toscas, Laufman, Prosecutor 1, and Prosecutor 2
from the Department participated in this discussion. The notes reflect
that there was a discussion of whether the decision to review the Abedin
emails on the Weiner laptop was inconsistent with the Midyear team's
investigative approach during the investigation. For example, the notes
indicate that Laufman asked, "What distinguishes this from other devices
we chose not to obtain? When think of Abedin's email, her emails
were of less probative significance." The notes reflect that Strzok
responded, "Volume -- 500k emails -- specifically domains of interest --
gap period (1^st^ 3 months)." Strzok also stated, according to the
notes, that "it is relevant that the Weiner laptop is in our
possession." Toscas agreed that possession of the laptop was a relevant
factor, stating that if the Midyear team had possessed the laptop during
the investigation, it "seems like we would've looked at it." Toscas went
on to state, according to the notes, "Will beg the question of why
we're not going to ask for all these folks' devices?" According to the
notes, Prosecutors 1 and 2 pointed out that the investigative team did
not previously seek to obtain devices from Clinton's senior aides.
Regarding a public announcement, the notes reflect that Laufman stated,
"Public announcement disproportionate to importance of what we're
doing." According to the notes, when Laufman asked whether the
Department would be shown a copy of the FBI's announcement in advance,
Strzok responded, "I don't know."

We asked Department personnel involved in the Midyear investigation
about these discussions. The Department personnel we interviewed told us
they disagreed with Comey's decision to notify Congress and that they
communicated that disagreement to the FBI. We summarize their concerns
below.

Laufman stated that the entire CES team found the notification "highly
objectionable." Laufman told us his concerns, stating:

A.  We had a very low expectation that, that the substance of what this
    the laptop might include would be anything novel or
    consequential that would occasion reassessing, let alone altering
    the findings and analysis and recommendations we had already made.
B.  To the extent that investigative action was necessary to review
    the data, it's not uncommon for the Bureau to have to nail down
    something that arises at the end of an investigation. And we
    ordinarily would forgo public comment about that unless and until
    it's appropriate to say something about the results of that
    activity. In many instances, it might not be appropriate to say
    anything publicly about it at all..
C.  This is October 28th. We're about a, a week away from our
    presidential election. And it particularly struck us as
    exceptionally inappropriate to make a statement that unmistakably
    would be construed as the Bureau's having reopened this
    investigation in that close a proximity to the day of the election.

We asked Laufman what he meant when he said there was a "low
expectation" that this evidence would alter the outcome of the Midyear
investigation. Laufman stated:

We had seen through our investigation, the types of emails that Huma
Abedin had been party to. And they were just not the kinds of emails
that really went to the core issues that were under legal analysis,
meaning they had to do with sort of scheduling, and.I mean, as
important as she is in a personal, confidential assistant manner to the
former Secretary, she wasn't as substantively engaged in, in some
matters that would have occasioned access to classified information or
dealing with classified issues. So.we had seen quite a bit up to that
point. And with respect to her, we hadn't seen her engaged via email
with anybody on the types of things that were material to our legal
analysis. So, assuming that what was going to be reviewed from this new
dataset was consistent with that, it seemed improbable to us that it was
going to, to change anything. And of course as we know now, it was a
giant nothing-burger.

Prosecutor 1 stated that the notification to Congress "didn't make any
sense." Prosecutor 1 told us that given Abedin's role and the evidence
they had previously reviewed there was little "likelihood of finding
anything of import in there." Instead of doing a public announcement,
Prosecutor 1 stated, "We should just investigate it and do it as quickly
as we could." We asked Prosecutor 1 about the potential presence of
BlackBerry emails from early in Clinton's tenure.

Prosecutor 1 stated that the FBI mentioned that "there could be
information that covered that BlackBerry period from the period at the
front end of the tenure," but added:

I felt like a lot of the analysis was based upon what, what could be in
there and the opportunity cost of sort of missing out on that. Of
course, to me that's a different analysis than making an announcement
about it. We didn't want to be seen to be in favor of forgoing the
effort entirely.

Prosecutor 1 stated that the FBI seemed "very concerned about
transparency with the public" and "had already kind of decided what they
were going to do" prior to consulting with the Department.

Prosecutor 2 told us that the Department was "shocked" that the FBI was
even considering notifying Congress about this development. Prosecutor 2
said that she did not necessarily view the Weiner laptop as a
significant development in the Midyear investigation. Prosecutor 2
stated:

Because over the course of this investigation, we haven't sought out
personal devices of anybody other than Hillary Clinton. So we haven't
asked, for example, for like Huma's personal laptops, her personal
BlackBerries. We have her state.gov stuff, but that's like, that of
Huma's is all we've searched.

So, there's a threshold question in my mind of whether, like, this is
even something that needs to be searched. And based on the, the iffyness
on that threshold question, and then the likely significance of this
device, it seems totally nuts to me that they would make an announcement
having no idea what is on this device, having not looked at it. And in,
and in terms of like the impact that this announcement could have.

And I remember being on the phone call like, how are you, asking like
how on earth are you going to word this announcement so it's accurate
and doesn't, doesn't like, you know, open a much bigger can of worms
than is really the significance of this recent finding. I mean at this
point.we have no idea.. We just know that like some of Huma's
emails are in FBI's custody. Like, of course Huma has other emails.
Like, how is this a game changer?

Prosecutor 2 also told us that she believed the FBI would not listen to
any of the arguments they put forth. She stated, "There's a defeated
feeling at this point that like Strzok was given the task of like
pretend to DOJ that you're hearing them out. And he was going to, you
know, humor us by having this conference call, but like that nothing we
said mattered on that call."

Recalling a discussion with Strzok in this time period, Toscas stated,
"I was really upset and I basically said, you know this is BS. We don't
talk about our stuff publicly. We don't announce things. We do things
quietly." Toscas told us that the justification provided by the FBI for
why it needed to notify Congress was what he called "the Comey Rule,"
meaning a duty to correct the record with Congress because Comey
testified to "one thing" and circumstances have now changed. Toscas told
us that, in his opinion, the October 28 letter demonstrates that "as
soon as you deviate from normal practice" once---meaning the July 5
statement---"you're going to have to adjust to deviations all along."
Toscas explained:

One of the things that I tell people all the time, after having been in
the Department for almost 24 years now, is I stress to people and people
who work at all levels, the institution has principles and there's
always an urge when something important or different pops up to say, we
should do it differently or those principles or those protocols you know
we should---we might want to deviate because this is so different. But
the comfort that we get as people, as lawyers, as representatives, as
employees and as an institution, the comfort we get from those
institutional policies, protocols, has, is an unbelievable thing through
whatever storm, you know whatever storm hits us, when you are within the
norm of the way the institution behaves, you can weather any of it
because you stand on the principle.

And once you deviate, even in a minor way, and you're always going to
want to deviate. It's always going to be something important and some
big deal that makes you think, oh let's do this a little differently.
But once you do that, you have removed yourself from the comfort of
saying this institution has a way of doing things and then every
decision is another ad hoc decision that may be informed by our policy
and our protocol and principles, but it's never going to be squarely
within them.

McCord was Acting AAG for the National Security Division at this time
and she told us that she thought the notification was "a bad idea."
McCord stated, "I believe there were conversations between Toscas
and ODAG and the Bureau expressing our view that we should at least get
a handle first on whether these are just duplicates because it could be
a big nothing."

**B. Department and FBI Leadership Discussions**

After deciding on October 27 that he needed to notify Congress, Comey
told us that he instructed Rybicki to reach out to the Department about
the notification. Comey stated that he told Rybicki, "I want you to tell
DOJ that I think I need to inform Congress of this step. And please tell
the DAG and the AG I'm happy to speak to them, but that's what I'm
thinking. I welcome their feedback." Comey stated that he did not
remember his specific directions to Rybicki, "but the substance would
have been something like, call Axelrod, tell him where we are and
that I think we have an obligation to notify" Congress "that we're
taking this step."

We asked Comey why he decided to seek the Department's advice in
October, but not in July. Comey stated:

I'm not sure, I think given Loretta's position, I thought the July
decision I had to do it given where Loretta had landed and that it was
the decision best calculated to protect the Department.. In this
circumstance, I wasn't positive I was right, making a very hard
decision, I thought if they want to get involved in this, it's not
necessarily a bad thing. I thought it would be a very bad thing if I
was.because Loretta might well say, don't do that, don't do that in
July. Here, I guess I thought about it slightly differently. I thought
it was a hard call and if they wanted to weigh in on it, offer their
view, say we'll take the decision, that maybe it was a little less
courageous frankly than in July, I'm just thinking out loud here, maybe
it was a product of having gotten the pain after July, but I'm not sure,
I'll think more about that. I'm not sure. Yeah, that's my reaction to
it.

Comey told us that he did not have any concerns about potential bias
when consulting with Lynch on this decision. We asked Comey why that was
the case given the concerns about Lynch that led to his July 5
statement. Comey replied, "Probably because I saw that reasonable people
could see the framing differently than I, in the way I didn't feel that
way with her refusal to step out, the semirecusal, I think."

**1. Comey's Decision Not to Engage Directly with Lynch or Yates**

We asked Comey why he delegated communication with the Department to
Rybicki instead of talking to Yates and Lynch directly. Comey stated:

I think because of the way, the distance they've been taking on the
whole thing I wanted to offer them the opportunity to honestly to step
away from it. That I wanted to offer them the opportunity---I didn't
want to jam them and I wanted to offer them the opportunity to think
about and decide whether they wanted to be engaged on it.

Comey emphasized that the reason he had Rybicki reach out to the
Department was because he "wanted to offer them the opportunity to take
this decision."

**2. Phone Calls between Rybicki and Axelrod**

Rybicki stated that he spoke with Axelrod on the afternoon of October
27.

Rybicki told us his conversation with Axelrod was "twofold" and
explained,

To let him know that the Director had decided to, the Director had
decided to authorize the seeking of the search warrant. And there was no
real reaction to that from Axelrod. I think he, I think he perhaps
knew that was coming, or, he didn't seem surprised in any way. And then
two was the second part that the Director felt he had the obligation to
supplement the record.. Axelrod had a very strong reaction. You
know, you know, no, we just don't do that. Right? We, you know, we don't
do that.

Rybicki stated that he and Axelrod had "a series of phone calls" the
rest of the day.

After the initial call to Axelrod, Rybicki told us that his
understanding was that

Axelrod was speaking for both Yates and Lynch in their subsequent calls.
We asked Rybicki why Comey and Yates did not speak directly. Rybicki
stated that he "had asked whether they wanted to speak to the Director,
and, and Axelrod said no."

Rybicki told us that he asked Axelrod to provide the FBI with any
Department policy or guidance dealing with investigative activity near
an election. Rybicki stated that Axelrod did not believe the
congressional notification would technically violate Department policy,
but was outside of "the normal course." Rybicki told us that he
explained Comey's thinking to Axelrod, stating that Comey "felt
strongly" and "felt he had the obligation" to notify Congress.

Axelrod stated that he received a call from Rybicki on October 27 and
Rybicki informed him "that the Director was intending to send a letter
to Congress notifying them" of the decision to examine the
Midyear-related emails on the Weiner laptop. Axelrod described his
reaction as "surprise, concern, dismay" and stated:

I told Rybicki like in that initial call look, obviously I'll have
to talk to folks here and, you know, call you back. But I said, but I
will give you my initial reaction which is that.this would be
a very bad idea. Contrary to.Department policies and procedures,
both about, you know, taking overt investigative steps so close to an
election and talking to the Hill about, you know, investigations.. It
just struck me as incredibly problematic.

Axelrod told us that he and Rybicki "talked it through a little bit" and
Rybicki asked Axelrod to send him the relevant Department policies.
Axelrod told us that contacted Ray Hulser, then Section Chief of the
Department's Public Integrity Section, to get information on the
relevant policies.

Axelrod stated that Rybicki told him "that the Director believes he has
an obligation to correct a misimpression that Congress has" that the
Midyear investigation is concluded. Axelrod told us that this was "the
key part" of their conversation. Axelrod stated that he asked Rybicki
where Comey had promised to update Congress and Rybicki replied that it
related more to the "overall tenor" of Comey's testimony to Congress.
Axelrod told us that he tried to convince Rybicki that Comey and the FBI
would be better served following Department policies and procedures.
Axelrod continued:

Rybicki never said look, I don't think that's the policy or I don't
think that's the procedure or I don't understand.. He was all
like yeah, I get all that but this is different. This is separate. The
Director has testified. The Director believes that Congress has, now has
a misimpression and so it's the Director's you know, butt on the line.
And he needs to do this. And you know, and if he doesn't, you know, the
concern is it's not survivable for him.

We asked Axelrod what he understood Rybicki to mean by the comment that
this would not be survivable for Comey. Axelrod stated:

I understood that to mean that they thought that the heat the Director
would get from the Hill, right, so that if this doesn't, you know, he
doesn't surface it and then.afterwards when it comes out that the
Bureau had this information but kept it quiet that there would be calls
for his resignation that he wouldn't be able to survive.

Axelrod stated that Rybicki told him that the FBI was also concerned
that the information would leak if no notification was made.

We asked Rybicki if he told Axelrod that failing to notify Congress
would not be survivable for Comey. Rybicki told us that he did not
"remember using that language." Rybicki stated, "I certainly conveyed
how seriously Director Comey felt about it. But I, I don't recall, you
know, the survivability of it. I just, sitting here I don't." We also
asked Rybicki if he more generally conveyed that there would be
"political heat and a call to resign" if Congress was not notified.
Rybicki replied, "Not that I can recall. I remember telling him the
Director felt strongly. But I don't remember sort of political heat,
calls to resign, just that he felt strongly and that he, he himself felt
he had the obligation."

We asked Comey if he expressed concerns at the time about not being able
to survive as the FBI Director if Congress discovered post-election that
he had not notified them of this development in the Midyear
investigation. As previously noted, Comey stated that it would cause
"catastrophic damage" to the FBI, the Department, and to a Clinton
presidency. He said that he did not remember expressing his concerns in
terms of survivability, but added, "I'm sure I said something like, if I
chose conceal over speak, I ought to be fired, I ought to be hung out, I
would be run out of town because of the damage it will have brought to
this. I'm sure I said things like that."

We asked others in FBI leadership if they heard Comey state that failing
to notify Congress would not be survivable. Bowdich stated he did not
recall Comey making that comment, but did remember Comey saying:

I am going to take a huge hit on this, but it's the right thing to do.
And I remember him, it struck me that not only was the organization
going to take a hit, but he even, I remember him pointing and saying I
am going to suffer personally from this as well. But he felt it was the
right decision to make.

Anderson stated that Comey viewed sending at the letter to Congress as
the option that "would do the least damage to the Bureau's long-term
credibility and integrity as an institution."

Baker stated, "I think Comey may have said like I could be
impeached" or "something along those lines." We asked Baker to explain
the context for that remark. Baker stated:

It may have been during the meeting, one of the two meetings on the 28th
or 27th.. Some of the stuff that gets talked about at those
meetings.he and I talked about separately later and kind of repeated
it. But at some point in time, he raised, I don't remember the context
exactly. He raised the issue of, you know, potentially he could get
impeached for this if he doesn't tell them this.

Baker told us that because Comey "had testified under oath, and now that
something different has happened, people are going to react to this
big-time" if it was leaked or the FBI told Congress "after the election
or whatever."

**3. Internal Department Discussions**

Axelrod told us that he discussed the congressional notification with
both Yates and Lynch. Yates stated that Axelrod told her that "he got a
call from Rybicki about the Director writing a letter" to Congress.
Yates stated:

Rybicki told Axelrod that the Director feels like he has a personal
ethical obligation. Because he had told them that the investigation was
closed. Because we had these new emails. And we agreed we should get a
search warrant for the emails, by the way. I thought we should. We need
to find out what's on there. But that because he had told them that it
was a closed investigation he had a personal obligation to tell them
that it was, an ethical obligation to tell them that they were now
reviewing these new emails.

Yates also told us that she remembered "being told that FBI doesn't
think it's survivable for the Director for him not to" notify Congress.
Yates stated that one of the reasons that the FBI "gave for why they
felt like Comey had to go to Congress is that they felt confident
that the New York Field Office would leak it and that it would come out
regardless of whether he advised Congress or not."

Lynch stated that she was told that Axelrod "had gotten a call" that the
Weiner laptop "had potentially relevant emails on it" and Comey "felt
that because of his prior testimony over the summer, that he had an
obligation to notify Congress of it." Lynch told us that it was
presented to her as the FBI was notifying the Department that Comey felt
he needed to and had an obligation to make this notification. Lynch
stated that this obligation was described to her as "an ethical
obligation both based on testimony, but also as a matter of ethics to
notify Congress of new information in this investigation." Lynch told us
that she did not recall the FBI asking for the Department's feedback.
Lynch continued:

And then at one point, I think Axelrod relayed information again
from Rybicki saying that the Director's view was that he had to provide
this information to Congress, that he was concerned about the
information being leaked from the New York office in even more negative
ways, that he was concerned about, he was very concerned about that. He
expressed that to the FBI and Rybicki shared that. And that he also was
concerned that if, if in fact he did not provide this information to
Congress, and either it was leaked or later on we discussed it in some
Department-approved way, that it was not survivable. And that was the
phrase that was given to us. And both the DAG and I said, I think we
both repeated the same, you know, what do you mean not survivable, one
of those chorus things. And Axelrod said that was just the phrase
that Rybicki had used. It was not survivable.. We certainly took
it as coming from the Director. It would not be survivable in his, in
his view for either him or the FBI. I didn't think that he was thinking
of the Department at large at that point, so we never got, and
Axelrod said he did, when he heard that he said the exact same
question that anybody would have, for whom? But he just got it wouldn't
be survivable.

Lynch stated that Rybicki's call started a conversation within the
Department about the Department's response. Lynch told us that Axelrod
examined Comey's prior testimony and Department personnel discussed
whether or not that created an obligation. Lynch stated:

And my view was, look, you can, you can read it any way you want, but if
he's looking at it and saying it does, that's his view. You're not going
to change his mind by saying here's another interpretation of this
particular statement. That's not the issue. The issue is should this
happen.should this be done regardless of, of what's been testified to
prior or what's happened.

Lynch told us that her view was "let's find out what's on this computer
before you start talking about it at all." Lynch added, "Even if you
view it as I need to say something to Congress, you don't have anything
to say" at this point.

Yates stated that the Department began "almost nonstop" discussion on
how to respond to the FBI. Yates told us that, among the factors
discussed, were the Department's policies, the lack of knowledge about
what was actually on the Weiner laptop, and the fact that the Department
had not yet obtained a search warrant. Yates stated that the FBI did not
dispute the Department's policies. Instead, Yates stated, "It all kept
coming back to, and it was always framed as this is a personal ethical
obligation that Jim Comey has. Not a Department strategic decision. Not
a

Department even policy decision. But a personal ethical obligation that
he has."

**4. Decision Not to Order Comey to Stand Down**

Lynch described the Department's decision-making process to us. She
stated, "We had a discussion about, well, we need to make sure that
at least it's conveyed that we don't want this letter to go out. We
think, we think it's not only against policy but it's harmful given the
calendar, meaning the timing of the election." Lynch stated that there
was also "some discussion about whether either the DAG or I should call
directly to the Director and whether or not that was a good idea." Lynch
told us that "the staff's view" was a direct call from either of them
"was not going to change anything based upon the discussions that
Axelrod was having with Rybicki." Lynch continued:

And ultimately what we decided to do was to, was to continue to have the
staff discussions and have Axelrod convey the strong view that
neither the DAG nor I felt this letter should go out. And that we
thought that it was going to cause serious problems. The response we got
back was essentially the Director heard us, took that into
consideration. Also took into consideration whoever he was speaking
with.at the FBI, and was going to send the letter in any event.

We asked Lynch why she did not directly order Comey to stand down and
not send the letter to Congress. Lynch told us:

I thought about it. I went back and forth on it. And we did in the room.
We went back and forth on it. And ultimately, I did have a concern, and
we had discussed this in the, in the small group also about the
perception of Department leadership trying to somehow prevent
information damaging to a candidate from coming out and that also being
a political problem, because we also had the, we talked about it from
the sense of, you know, you talk about reopening an investigation into
either candidate, you know, whether we had, for example, said something
about, you know, the, the Russian stuff at that point in time. We
wouldn't have done that.

But the concern of appearing to put a thumb on the scale for a
particular candidate was something we were wrestling with. And that's
what I was wrestling with, was if in fact someone comes to you and says
I have a legal, moral, and ethical obligation to do something, this is
what I think is right, and then you say well you can't do it because of
this policy and don't do it, then are you in fact then sort of doing the
same thing only on the other side. And I will tell you, we went back and
forth. Certainly I went back and forth in my mind over what to do, as to
whether or not I should call him directly or have the DAG call him
directly first, then have me call him. Either way, should there be a
direct call to him?

We asked Lynch to respond to the criticism that she essentially
abdicated her responsibility by not ordering Comey to stand down. Lynch
responded:

I would say I was trying to get him to do the right thing. And I was
hoping he would do the right thing. And I would say that you can have
that criticism of me if you, if you would like. But I really felt that,
that, frankly, when I say he didn't need me to tell him, I don't mean to
say that I had no role in it at all. But this shouldn't have come up.
This shouldn't have been an issue. This, this should not have been
something that was being considered.

Lynch told us that she "went back and forth" on whether to order Comey
to stand down, but she "thought at that point.it could lead to
greater damage," meaning that Comey would disobey and send the letter
anyway.

We also asked Yates why she or Lynch did not directly order Comey to
stand down and not send the letter to Congress. Yates stated:

I certainly discussed it with Loretta.. We looked at this and
thought, all right. It was not presented to us as, again, you know,
Comey's kind of thinking about this and he's wanting to know what
you guys, and I don't mean to be sarcastic here at all. But this was
really important how this was framed. It wasn't a he's seeking your view
on this or he's torn and wants to know.. It was framed as he feels
obligated ethically to do this. And it was like a notification. He feels
obligated to do it. That's a difficult situation because, yes, either
one of us had the authority to order him not to do it. But you got to
play out what happens after that..

Let's imagine a scenario here where we order him not to do it. We're
then ordering him not to do something he says he feels like he's
ethically obligated to do. There are a couple options. He can say.I'm
sorry that you're saying that but I feel ethically obligated and I'm
going to do it anyway. So then we're in a scenario where he notifies
Congress. He's been telling us it's going to come out. Because on top of
this I'm ethically obligated to do it paired with that was it's going to
leak out. It's going to come out and if I don't tell Congress that's
going to put me in a very bad position because they're going to find out
anyway and they're going to find out that I didn't tell them when I
could have. So we're in a scenario where he says he's ethically
obligated to do it.. We weren't at all convinced that he would
follow such an order not to do it. If he didn't follow the order and he
did it anyway and then it comes out we were ordering him not to do it
that's a very bad position for the Department of Justice. Because we're
then telling the Director of the FBI not to do something he feels like
he's ethically obligated to do. And it takes a bad situation and it
makes it even worse because then you add what would be the perception of
a concealment on top of this that we thought would be even worse for
DOJ.

There's another option there which is he, we order him not to do it and
he resigns. And then it comes out that that's why he's resigning. That
seemed like a very real possibility to us, particularly against the
backdrop of the situation with John Ashcroft in the hospital room where
he had the resignation letter drafted. That wasn't even an ethical
obligation. That was something where he disagreed with them about the
statutory authority there. So we thought it was a very real possibility
that he could resign and then it's, of course it's going to come out.
And so that then is a bad situation for DOJ because it's got the
concealment there as well.

So we couldn't figure out a scenario that was not going to, again, take
a bad situation and make it even worse when we ordered him to do it when
it had been framed as his personal ethical obligation. And we looked at
it from every conceivable angle.

Axelrod stated that he participated in discussions with both Yates and
Lynch about how to respond to the proposed congressional notification.
Axelrod told us that he did not remember anyone advocating that Lynch
order Comey not to notify

Congress. Axelrod stated that there were "three possible outcomes, all
of which

were really bad" should Lynch order Comey not to send to the letter.
First,

Axelrod told us that Comey could obey the order and that "tees up an
obstruction of Congress investigation" of Lynch because she has
forbidden Comey from correcting a misimpression to Congress. Second,
Axelrod stated that Comey could ignore the order and send the letter
anyway, and then "you're in the same spot except the FBI Director has
disobeyed a direct order from the AG so then you have to fire him."
Third, Comey could resign. Axelrod told us, "None of those are
good for the institutions. None of those are good for the policies
and the procedures or the, sort of the goals of keeping DOJ and FBI out
of politics. None of those good for the

AG personally."

5. Decision Not to Engage Directly with Comey
---------------------------------------------

We asked Lynch why she or Yates did not contact Comey directly. Lynch
stated, "I didn't get the impression that a private conversation was
going to get me any more information than we were being given before."
Lynch stated that she was "surprised" that Comey did not contact her or
Yates directly and noted that he had spoken directly to both of them in
July. Lynch also stated that Comey "set the terms of" the conversation
by starting it at the Rybicki-Axelrod level.

We asked Yates why she or Lynch did not contact Comey directly. Yates
stated that the FBI decided to have Rybicki reach out to Axelrod
initially and "it was just a notification to" Axelrod. Yates
continued:

So we went through the thought process of is there a viable way to order
him not to do it and we concluded we didn't think that there was without
it blowing up in a much worse way than we were already in.. So the
second step in the analysis thing is okay, if we're not going to order
him should Loretta get on the phone with him? Should I get on the phone
with him and talk about it? And we went through that analysis as well
and we came out the same place for these reasons.

Again, he's not saying this is a strategic or policy question he has. He
feels ethically obligated. Both of us have the authority to order him
not to do it. So if we call him up I can't have a conversation with him
about this without telling him I think it's a huge mistake for him to do
this. The feeling was is that that would be portrayed as strong-arming
him when you have the authority to be able to tell him not to do it and
you have this conversation with him saying, I really don't think you
should do this..

Yates told us that she felt this concern about "strong-arming" was later
borne out in Comey's description of the meeting with Lynch in September
2015 about whether to call the investigation a matter or investigation.
Yates continued:

And then you layer on top of that this. Strategically based on my
interaction with Comey over all of this time I felt like our best
chance at being able to convince him not to do this was going to be from
his own, his discussions with his own people. That I had seen in too
many meetings, and understand this, that if I had raised an objection to
something FBI was doing that Comey understandably was very defensive
of his agency and he would push back hard. I didn't think there was any
way in the world he was going to go back to his people and say, I just
got off the phone with the AG or I just got off the phone with the DAG
and they convinced me that I really don't have this personal ethical
obligation I've told all of you that I have. I felt like strategically
the best way to convince him not to do it was going to be to convince
his people that he shouldn't do it. And he in discussions with them
could come to that conclusion because he could change his mind
internally. I didn't think he would change his mind through a discussion
with either one of us.

Yates told us that she considered Rybicki to be his "confidant" and the
person that the Department needed to convince to change Comey's mind in
this situation.

We asked Axelrod why Lynch did not contact Comey directly. Axelrod
stated a direct conversation on the phone could lead to "a
misunderstanding" or the impression that Lynch "was leaning on" Comey.
Axelrod specifically highlighted the matter/investigation meeting
between Comey and Lynch in September 2015 as an example of such a
misunderstanding. Axelrod also stated that everyone understood Rybicki
to be "a proxy for the Director." Axelrod added:

I thought about this a lot in the aftermath, right. And I've
thought.if the reaction from Rybicki or the FBI had ever been oh,
we didn't know you guys felt that way. We didn't know what your guys'
view was.then I would have both been really disappointed in myself
but also wondered like oh, well if only, right, something got garbled
somewhere. If only, you know, the, one of the principals had been able
to speak directly to the Director we could have conveyed the message
more clearly. I've never heard that.and I don't think that's the
case. I was quite clear with Rybicki as to what our building's
view.. It was clear that was not just Matt Axelrod's view but the
Department's view was that the Director should not do this.. I'm sure
that was his takeaway. What I put is this, doing this violates our
policies and procedures and traditions.. I said repeatedly this is,
you know, this is not only a really bad idea but it, it's contrary to
how we do business. And actually, I used those exact words as well. It
was contrary to how we do business.

**6. Comey's Reaction to the Department's Response**

Comey stated that Rybicki reported that the Department "didn't wish to
speak to me, but that their advice would be not to do it and that they
didn't think it was necessary." Comey added that Rybicki told him that
the Department "recommended against" the congressional notification
and thought it was "a bad idea."

We asked Comey why he asked for the Department's feedback and then
ignored the feedback that he received. Comey told us, "I thought the
better view of it was that we had to. They were leaving it to me
essentially and I took it, I knew that I was alone at that point in
time, but my view was, as between these two options, I disagree." Comey
emphasized that neither Yates nor Lynch gave him a direct order. Comey
continued, "I would not have sent it if they had told me not to. Instead
I got this, we recommend against it. We don't think it's consistent with
our policy. But it's up to him was the message conveyed to me." Comey
told us that he felt that he gave Lynch and Yates "the chance to
engage," but "they didn't wish to participate, it's up to you, basically
I took that as, it's up to you. We don't think it's a good idea. We
advise against it. I honestly thought they were taking kind of a
cowardly way out."^[^168^](#fn168){#fnref168 .footnote-ref}^

We asked Comey if anything short of a direct order would have prevented
the notification. He stated:

I don't know what, I don't know is the answer. I don't, because I don't
know what argument that I haven't thought of or that hasn't been made or
that we didn't make in discussing this they would've made, so I don't
know, but, so in the absence of that, if they directed me not to do it,
I would not have done it.

Comey stated that he also thought the October 28 congressional
notification was consistent with Department policy. He stated, "Well
Department policy is we don't comment on investigations unless there's
a, you know whatever the exact language is, overriding public interest.
In my view there was a powerful public interest in that division between
speaking and concealing, between really bad and catastrophic."

We asked Comey how Lynch or Yates could have ordered him not to send the
letter if they understood it to be his personal or ethical obligation to
Congress. Comey stated:

Of course they could. They could say, I mean circumstances where a
Department lawyer thinks that they need to disclose something in a
particular case and their supervisor says, no we don't, we don't do
that, and so you have to decide then, do you believe it's reasonable and
consistent with the obligations of the lawyer for the United States or
do you believe that your supervisor is doing something unethical and
then you have to decide what to do about it.

**V. Finalizing the FBI's October 28, 2016 Letter to Congress**

After Comey decided to notify Congress, the FBI began discussing
internally how that notification should occur. Anderson told us that
because the "animating rationale" behind the notification was to update
Comey's prior testimony to Congress, the FBI decided that "a letter to
Congress was the right way to go about it." The letter was transmitted
on October 28.

In this section we discuss the drafting of the letter along with several
key edits made during the drafting process. We also describe discussions
with the Department about the letter and Comey's email to all FBI
employees.

**A. October 28, 2016 Letter to Congress**

At approximately 11:50 a.m. on October 28, the FBI transmitted the
following letter to Congress, which we also provide as Attachment E:

In previous congressional testimony, I referred to the fact that the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) had completed its investigation of
former Secretary Clinton's personal email server. Due to recent
developments, I am writing to supplement my previous testimony.

In connection with an unrelated case, the FBI has learned of the
existence of emails that appear to be pertinent to the investigation. I
am writing to inform you that the investigative team briefed me on this
yesterday, and I agreed that the FBI should take appropriate
investigative steps designed to allow investigators to review these
emails to determine whether they contain classified information, as well
as to assess their importance to our investigation.

Although the FBI cannot yet assess whether or not this material may be
significant, and I cannot predict how long it will take us to complete
this additional work, I believe it is important to update your

Committees about our efforts in light of my previous testimony.

Later that day, after the letter was made public, Clinton's lawyer,
David

Kendall, contacted Baker to ask about the letter. According to Baker's
email to

Comey and the Midyear team, during the call Kendall complained that
Comey's "letter was 'tantalizingly ambiguous' and made statements that
were 'inchoate and highly ominous' such that what we had done was worse
than transparency because it allows people to make whatever they want
out of the letter to the prejudice of Secretary Clinton." In the email,
Baker stated that he told Kendall "that I could not respond to his
requests at this time."

**B. Drafting the Letter and Key Edits**

Comey described the drafting of the letter in the following terms:

Our goal was to make the disclosure to Congress accurate, fair and as
non-misleading as humanly possible. So we spent a lot of time that night
of October 27 on the wordsmithing of that language to give fair
notice that we were taking this action, but not to put us in a position
where it's wildly overinterpreted one way or the other. And so the next
day, the next morning, I had finally approved the language. Comey
continued:

We struggled with the language of it. Everyone talks about my vague
letter. Maybe it's vague, but it was structured with great care not to
overstate what might be there or understate what might be there
because---I think I said this in the letter, I haven't looked at it in a
while---we don't know, but feel an obligation to say that we're
undertaking these new investigative steps. And I think part of the
public misconception about it is, and I don't know how I would have
fixed this, is people have the sense that it was some sort of marginal
lead, that it was a frolic and detour kind of deal. And I don't know how
we could have done that, but maybe we would've been better off if there
was some way to convey, yeah there could be a real deal here, but that
then would be unfair because you would be overinterpreting the evidence.

In his book, Comey discussed the "carefully" chosen wording of the
October 28 letter and why it contained limited content. Comey explained,
"Because we didn't know what we had and what we might find, any further
public statement would be inherently limited and misleading and only add
confusion and damage to the FBI."^[^169^](#fn169){#fnref169
.footnote-ref}^

FBI Attorney 1 told us that she and Strzok began drafts of the letter to

Congress after leaving the initial meeting with Comey on October 27. FBI
Attorney

1 stated that she and Strzok combined their drafts and presented the
joint draft to Baker. FBI Attorney 1 continued, "We talked to Baker,
I remember handwritten edits that Baker put in, which were
wordsmithing a lot of. And then it moved to email so that people could
circulate it."

We identified two significant phrases in the letter that were discussed
during the editing process. We discuss each below.

**1. "Appear to be Pertinent"**

The letter sent to Congress stated that "the FBI has learned of the
existence of emails that *appear to be pertinent* to the investigation"
and noted that "the FBI cannot yet assess whether or not this material
may be significant". (Emphasis added). FBI Attorney 1's first draft
stated that the emails "may be relevant" and noted that "at this
time, it is impossible to determine if the emails are new or
duplicative." Strzok's first draft stated that the emails were "related
to the FBI's prior investigation" of the Clinton email server and noted
that "the FBI cannot assess at this time the significance of this
material." Various formulations similar to these were discussed before
deciding upon the language ultimately used in the letter.

FBI Attorney 1 told us that two competing considerations resulted in the
language used. On the one hand, FBI Attorney 1 stated that the FBI did
not want to undermine the probable cause needed to obtain the search
warrant, "so we couldn't say it may be relevant when we, we needed
to have probable cause to actually look at" the emails. On the other
hand, FBI Attorney 1 stated that the FBI did not want to overstate what
was on the Weiner laptop and the FBI wanted "to make it clear that even
though we were getting a search warrant, that did not mean there was a
smoking gun there." Anderson echoed this stating, "I was concerned
that.saying that they were relevant or were pertinent wasn't
supported by where we were in the process. In other words, we hadn't put
any eyes on any of the emails, so we really didn't know whether what we
were going to find, you know, was or wasn't relevant."

Baker stated that he found "may be pertinent" or similar formulations to
be "too vague" and "too wishy-washy." Indeed, Baker stated in an email,
on October 27 at 9:51 p.m., to the FBI officials involved in drafting
the letter:

If everyone wants "may be pertinent" then fine. All I am saying is that
even if they are all copies of what we already have, they are still
pertinent because they are copies and indicate where else the material
went and who may have had access to it. And if they only may be
pertinent why are we bothering with them and putting out this public
statement which we know will be a big deal.

Baker told us that because the FBI was seeking a search warrant for
these emails it was "saying there is probable cause to believe this is
evidence of a crime, therefore they are pertinent and we should be
willing to make that statement." Baker said there was some "pushback" on
this suggestion as others said "we're not 100% confident" that the
emails are pertinent. Baker stated that he came up with the "appear to
be pertinent" phrasing and "that seemed to thread the needle and make
everybody happy."

**2. "Briefed Me On This Yesterday"**

The letter sent to Congress also stated that "due to recent
developments, I am writing to supplement my previous testimony" and "I
am writing to inform you that the investigative team briefed me on this
yesterday." FBI Attorney 1's first draft stated that the FBI "has
recently retrieved emails" and "today, the FBI decided to conduct
additional investigative steps." Strzok's first draft stated that the
FBI "recently learned of the potential existence of emails" and "earlier
today, I decided the FBI will take investigative action." The joint
draft submitted by FBI Attorney 1 and Strzok to the others stated that
the FBI "recently learned of the existence of emails" and Comey decided
"earlier today" to take investigative action on these emails.

In providing comments and edits to the draft letter, Baker stated in an
email on the night of October 27, "The institution has known about
these for a while (albeit not long) but not 'yesterday.' What happened
today was the Director's decision." Baker recommended the letter state
that "I decided yesterday." We asked Baker about this recommendation.
Baker stated that he could not recall the discussion about this change
and also did not remember knowing at the time that Comey had been
previously briefed about the Weiner laptop.

3. Discussions About Letter With the Department
-----------------------------------------------

The FBI did not share a copy of the draft letter with the Department,
but rather read the proposed text of the letter to Axelrod and Toscas
during a telephone call. We found that, during the call, Axelrod
provided feedback regarding the letter, but we did not identify any
evidence showing that the FBI accepted his proposed edits.

Comey told us that he recalled telling Rybicki "to share the text of the
letter with the Department, ask for feedback." Comey further stated
that it was his understanding the Department provided "a lot" of edits
to the draft that were accepted. Comey said, "Yeah I think Matt Axelrod
added real value, yeah, is my recollection, shaping it in a different
way, shortening it at different parts."

Rybicki told us that he discussed the proposed letter with Axelrod and
Toscas on the telephone "and we read it to them, and they provided some
feedback."

Axelrod told us that the FBI never provided the Department with a copy
of the proposed letter, but stated that he did discuss the contents of
the letter with the FBI. Axelrod stated that Baker and Rybicki read
portions of the letter to Axelrod and Toscas over the phone, and that he
(Axelrod) suggested edits to the letter that the FBI did not accept.
Axelrod stated:

So, on that phone call when they read the first sentence I said to them,
to Rybicki and Baker is my memory of who was on the phone.. If that's
how you start the letter the headline is going to be case reopened. We
all agree that's not what we're doing. We're not reopening the case,
right? Agreement voiced on the phone by FBI. Agreement voiced by
Toscas. If that's your opening sentence that's going to be the
headline, case reopened. And what you need to, what you ought to do is
you're telling us that you need to send this letter because the Director
believes that he's left a misimpression. But remember when I pointed you
to the transcript what he said was if new information comes to light I
will bring it, I will, we will take a look at it.

You, why don't you reference that? Explain why you're, what you're
doing. Don't just make it seem like, you know, you're emailing them out
of nowhere. Say, I previously testified. I told you that if new
information came to light we would, you know, take a look at it. Some
new information has come to light. We're doing exactly what I said. So
that was one suggestion we made to them on the phone, which they
ignored.

And a second suggestion we made to them on the phone was that they
include some context about what the device was. In other words, that it
wasn't a Hillary Clinton device but that it was.the husband of a
former aide or former senior aide, right? Because, and that was
important for context because.if you don't put that context in there
could be a notion that something was hidden from the investigators that
only recently came to light instead of something that came in sideways.
But they rejected that suggestion as well.

Because I think what we, our pitch to them on the call was like, you say
you need to send this letter to avoid, to correct the misimpression
Congress has. You got to make damn sure that by sending the letter you
don't just create a different misimpression. They ignored our two
substantive suggestions. Those are the two I remember. And they sent the
letter I think basically the way they had, and I didn't see the full
text beforehand but basically it was, you know, what sort of, at least
the parts Baker had read to us on the phone it was consistent with, it
didn't, I don't think they changed a word.

Toscas said that the entire discussion about the contents of the letter
was

"awkward" since the Department "opposed every aspect of this."
Toscas stated, "But I do remember like at some point on our side feeling
like.if you're going to say it, there's a way to just sort of lay it
out a little bit more clearly that takes off some of the natural
suspicions that are going to be created by less clear, less specific,
and more ambiguous language." Toscas told us that he did not recall if
the FBI accepted any of the suggested edits provided by the Department.

**4. Comey Email to All FBI Employees**

At 3:08 p.m. on October 28, after news of the letter to Congress had
been publicly reported, Comey sent the following message to all FBI
employees:

This morning I sent a letter to Congress in connection with the
Secretary Clinton email investigation. Yesterday, the investigative team
briefed me on their recommendation with respect to seeking access to
emails that have recently been found in an unrelated case. Because those
emails appear to be pertinent to our investigation, I agreed that we
should take appropriate steps to obtain and review them.

Of course, we don't ordinarily tell Congress about ongoing
investigations, but here I feel an obligation to do so given that I
testified repeatedly in recent months that our investigation was
completed. I also think it would be misleading to the American people
were we not to supplement the record. At the same time, however, given
that we don't know the significance of this newly discovered collection
of emails, I don't want to create a misleading impression. In trying to
strike a balance, in a brief letter and in the middle of an election
season, there is significant risk of being misunderstood, but I wanted
you to hear directly from me about it.

**VI. Analysis of the Decision to Send the October 28 Letter**

We found no evidence that Comey's decision to send the October 28 letter
was influenced by political preferences. Instead, we found that his
decision was the result of several interrelated factors that were
connected to his concern that failing to send the letter would harm the
FBI and his ability to lead it, and his view that candidate Clinton was
going to win the presidency and that she would be perceived to be an
illegitimate president if the public first learned of the information
after the election. Although Comey told us that he "didn't make this
decision because he thought it would leak otherwise," several FBI
officials, including Baker and Strzok, told us that the concern about
leaks played a role in the decision. We concluded that, in considering
his choices, Comey failed to give adequate consideration to
long-established Department and FBI norms, policies, and expectations
that he applied in other cases. Although we acknowledge that Comey faced
a difficult situation with unattractive choices, in proceeding as he did
on October 28, Comey made a serious error of judgment.

Much like with his July 5 announcement, Comey engaged in ad hoc
decisionmaking based on his personal views even if it meant rejecting
longstanding Department policy or practice. For example, we found
unpersuasive Comey's explanation as to why transparency was more
important than Department policy and practice with regard to the
reactivated Midyear investigation while, by contrast, Department policy
and practice was more important to follow with regard to the Clinton
Foundation and Russia investigations.

**A. Substantive Assessment of Comey's Decision**

**1. FBI and Department Norms and Policies**

Comey had ample guidance in longstanding Department and FBI policies and
norms regarding making public statements about pending investigations
and taking actions that might affect elections.

To start, the Department and the FBI consistently decline to comment
publicly or to Congress regarding ongoing investigative activity. The
"stay silent" principle exists to protect the privacy and reputational
interests of the subjects of the investigation, the right to a fair
trial for those subsequently accused of crimes, the integrity of an
ongoing investigation or pending litigation, and the Department's
ability to effectively administer justice without political or other
undue outside influences. Comey endorsed this principle in general,
stating, "I believe very strongly that our rule should be, we don't
comment on pending investigations." This principle is embodied in
several regulations and policies set forth in Chapter

Two, including in policies regarding communications with Congress. USAM
1-8.030; Eric Holder, Attorney General, U.S. Department of Justice,
memorandum for Heads of Department Components and all U.S. Attorneys,
Communications with Congress, August 17, 2009; Robert Raben, Assistant
Attorney General, U.S. Department of Justice, letter to Congressman John
Linder, January 1, 2000. ("Although Congress has a clearly legitimate
interest in determining how the Department enforces statutes,
Congressional inquiries during the pendency of a matter pose an inherent
threat to the integrity of the Department's law enforcement and
litigation functions.").^185^ This principle is also reflected in 28
C.F.R. § 50.2, which provides, with respect to the release of
information to the news media, that "where information relating to the
circumstances of.an investigation would be highly prejudicial or
where the release thereof would serve no law enforcement function, such
information should not be made public." 28 C.F.R. § 50.2(b)(3)(iv).^186^
*See also* USAM 1-7.530, 9-11.130, 9-16.500, 9-27.760; FBI Media Policy
Guide 3.1.

In addition, the Department and the FBI have long observed a norm
against taking an action during the run-up to an election that could
impact an election. Although there is no codified "60-day rule," Comey
acknowledged that he has consistently adhered to this "take no action"
norm in the past: "I've lived my entire career in the Department of
Justice under the norm, the principle, that we, if at all possible,
avoid taking any action in the run up to an election, avoid taking any
action that could have some impact, even if unknown, on an election
whether that's a dogcatcher election or President of the United States."
Given the lack of a written policy, we recommend that the Department
consider providing guidance to agents and prosecutors concerning the
taking of overt investigative steps, indictments, public announcements,
or other actions that could impact an election.

These policies and norms formed the fundamental backdrop for Comey's
decision on October 28. Because of them, Comey's description of his
choice as being between "two doors," one labeled "speak" and one labeled
"conceal," was a false dichotomy. The two doors were actually labeled
"follow policy/practice" and "depart from policy/practice." His task was
not to conduct an ad hoc comparison of case-specific outcomes and risks.
Rather, the burden was on him to justify an extraordinary departure from
these established norms, policies, and precedent.

**2. Comey's Justification for Departing**

Comey's justification for departing from established norms was that
because he had previously told Congress and the public that the case was
over, staying silent would be misleading. But it is hardly unique for
the FBI to receive new information that might cause it to reactivate a
previously closed or dormant investigation. To our knowledge, the FBI
has not generally identified this circumstance as nullifying the stay
silent principle.

Comey admitted that he had made no explicit promise to make a further
announcement if new evidence were discovered. He stated, instead, that
he had

185. Current Department policy regarding communications with Congress
    continues to honor this principle. *See* Jefferson B. Sessions,
    Attorney General, U.S. Department of Justice, Memorandum for All
    Heads of Department Components, Communications with Congress, May
    2, 2018.
186. 28 C.F.R. § 50.2 is directed largely at preventing the prejudice to
    defendants or subjects from media publicity that might influence the
    outcome of a trial. However, it states that the guidelines it
    contains---including "stay silent"---are effective "from the time a
    person is the subject of a criminal investigation until any
    proceeding resulting from such an investigation has been terminated
    by trial or otherwise." 28 C.F.R. § 50.2(b)(1). An unfair trial is
    obviously not the only form of prejudice that may arise from media
    disclosures, especially in an investigation that does not result in
    a trial.

previously offered "maximal transparency" because that "enhances the
credibility of the Justice enterprise," and that maintaining that
transparency required him to update his July statement in October.

If so, the problem originated with Comey's elevation of "maximal
transparency" as a value overriding, for this case only, the principles
of "stay silent" and "take no action" that the FBI has consistently
applied to other cases. The Department and the FBI do not practice
"maximal transparency" in criminal investigations. It is not a value
reflected in the regulations, policies, or customs guiding FBI actions
in pending criminal investigations. To the contrary, the guidance to
agents and prosecutors is precisely the opposite---no transparency
except in rare and exceptional circumstances due to the potential harm
to both the investigation and to the reputation of anyone under
investigation.

Comey told us that the potentially great evidentiary significance of the
newly discovered emails would have made it particularly misleading to
stay silent. But we found that the FBI's basis for believing, as of
October 28, that the contents of the Weiner laptop would be significant
to the Clinton email investigation was overestimated. Comey and others
stated that they believed the Weiner laptop might contain the "missing
three months" of Clinton's emails from the beginning of her tenure when
she used a BlackBerry domain, and that these "golden emails" would be
particularly probative of intent, because they were close in time to
when she set up her server. However, at the time of the October 28
letter, the FBI had limited information about the BlackBerry data that
was on the laptop. The case agent assigned to the Weiner investigation
stated only that he saw at least one BlackBerry PIN message between
Clinton and Abedin. As of October 28, no one with any knowledge of the
Midyear investigation had viewed a single email message, and the Midyear
team was uncertain they would even be able to establish sufficient
probable cause to obtain a search warrant. Even the description of the
emails in the October 28 letter is at odds with Comey's emphasis on the
importance of the discovery. The letter was edited to state that the
emails "appear to be pertinent," because several members of the team
objected to the words "are pertinent" as an unsupportable overstatement.

Moreover, the Midyear team did not treat the BlackBerry emails as if
they were critical to completing a thorough investigation prior to
October. Rather, the team decided during the investigation not to obtain
personal devices that Clinton's senior aides used for State Department
work, because, among other reasons, they did not believe obtaining those
devices was necessary for a thorough investigation. Indeed, the Midyear
team did not ask Abedin's attorneys to turn over Abedin's personal
BlackBerry or laptop that she used during her employment at the State
Department, even though Abedin told the FBI that she had given those
devices to her attorneys so that they could produce her work-related
emails to the State Department.

Before October 28, Comey lauded the thoroughness of the investigation
and stated that declining prosecution was not a close
call.^[^170^](#fn170){#fnref170 .footnote-ref}^ If the vague and general
information known about the laptop contents was sufficient to "create a
reasonable likelihood.that will change our view" of the case, then it
is difficult to see how the investigation could have been as thorough as
Comey represented given the FBI's decision not to obtain similar devices
from Clinton's senior aides prior to July 5. Nor could the declination
decision have been such an easy call if unseen emails to and from one of
Clinton's aides could have resulted in a change in the Department's
prosecution assessment.

In fact, as detailed in Chapter Nine, every pertinent fact that the FBI
knew about the laptop in October was already known in late September.
Yet none of the Midyear investigators thought these were "golden emails"
then---a factor that contributed to the FBI's delay in acting on the
information, as discussed in Chapter Nine. In short, far too little was
known about these emails in October 2016 to justify departing from
Department norms, policies, and precedent.

**3. Comey's Comparison of Risks and Outcomes**

Instead of referring to and being guided by longstanding Department and
FBI policies and precedent, Comey conducted an ad hoc comparison of the
risks and outcomes associated with each option. He described the
potential consequences "concealing" the existence of the emails as
"catastrophic" to the FBI and the Department, because it would subject
the FBI and the Department to allegations that they had acted for
political reasons to protect Hillary Clinton. Instead, Comey said he
chose the option that he assessed as being just "really bad."

Even within the flawed analytical construct that Comey set up, he did
not assess risks evenhandedly. He assigned paramount significance to
avoiding the reputational risk of staying silent: that he and the FBI
would be unfairly accused of hiding the emails to protect candidate
Clinton. But he appears to have placed no comparable value on the
corresponding risk from making the public statement: that he and the FBI
would not only be accused of violating long-standing

Department and FBI policy and practice, but that he also would be
unfairly accused of hyping the emails in a manner that hurt candidate
Clinton. We believe that Comey's unequal assessment of these risks was
the product of his belief that Clinton was going to win the election.
Comey told us, "I am sure I was influenced by the tacit assumption that
Hillary Clinton was sure to be the next President." This expectation
likely led him to focus too heavily on what he perceived to be the
consequences of not revealing the new information, namely undermining
the legitimacy of Clinton's presidency and harming the reputation of the
FBI. Ironically, in his effort to avoid the FBI or himself being seen as
political, Comey based his decision, in part, on his assessment of the
likely outcome of the political process.

In our view, assumptions about the outcome of an election should not
affect how the FBI or the Department applies longstanding policies and
norms.

We believe that Comey underestimated his own ability to address the
unfair criticism that he feared would ensue if he stayed silent. Comey
acknowledged to us, "I've lived my entire career in the Department of
Justice under the norm, the principle, that we.avoid taking any
action that could have some impact, even if unknown, on an
election.." Thus, if Comey had chosen to have the FBI seek the search
warrant but not send the October 28 letter, he would have had a
principled response if he was asked about his decision: "This is the way
we always do it, for the following good reasons." And he could have
stated, accurately and in good conscience, that he applied this
principle evenhandedly with respect to the Clinton email investigation
and other pending FBI investigations. The FBI never commented publicly
on the Russia investigation until after the election, and he refused to
comment publicly about the Clinton Foundation investigation. And,
earlier in October 2016, Comey declined on behalf of the FBI to
participate in a U.S. Intelligence Community statement warning about
Russian interference because "it exposes us to accusations of launching
our own 'October surprise.'" Had he observed the same principle with
respect to the Clinton email investigation, the evenhandedness of his
decisions would have been apparent. Indeed, much of the criticism that
Comey received for not revealing before the election information about
the Russia and Clinton Foundation investigations was due to the
perceived lack of evenhandness given the disclosure he made on October
28 in the Clinton email investigation.

In reaching our conclusion about the October 28 letter, we found the
testimony of Deputy Assistant Attorney General George Toscas to be on
point:

One of the things that I tell people all the time, after having been in
the Department for almost 24 years now, is I stress to people and people
who work at all levels, the institution has principles and there's
always an urge when something important or different pops up to say, we
should do it differently or those principles or those protocols you know
we should---we might want to deviate because this is so different. But
the comfort that we get as people, as lawyers, as representatives, as
employees and as an institution, the comfort we get from those
institutional policies, protocols, has, is an unbelievable thing through
whatever storm, you know whatever storm hits us, when you are within the
norm of the way the institution behaves, you can weather any of it
because you stand on the principle.

And once you deviate, even in a minor way, and you're always going to
want to deviate. It's always going to be something important and some
big deal that makes you think, oh let's do this a little differently.
But once you do that, you have removed yourself from the comfort of
saying this institution has a way of doing things and then every
decision is another ad hoc decision that may be informed by our policy
and our protocol and principles, but it's never going to be squarely
within them.

**4. Fear of Leaks**

Comey denied that a fear of leaks influenced his decision to send the
October 28 letter to Congress. However, other witnesses told us that a
concern about leaks played a role in the decision. As Baker stated, "We
were quite confident that.. If we don't put out a letter,
somebody is going to leak it. That definitely was discussed.."
Numerous witnesses connected this concern about leaks specifically to
NYO and told us that FBI leadership suspected that FBI personnel in NYO
were responsible for leaks of information in other matters. Even
accepting Comey's assertion that leaks played no role in his decision,
we found that, at a minimum, a fear of leaks influenced the thinking of
those who were advising him.

We also note that these discussions on October 27 and 28 were occurring
at almost the same time that FBI leadership was focused on how the
Midyear investigation was being publicly portrayed. As detailed in
Chapter Eight, the FBI was devoting significant time and attention in
October 2016 responding to both public and private criticism of the
Midyear investigation. That included sending talking points to FBI SACs
on October 21 for their use in responding to such criticism. Comey told
us that these efforts were necessary to "protect the credibility of the
FBI in American life." As a result, at the time Comey was deciding
whether to send the October 28 letter to Congress, the FBI had just one
week earlier empowered its officials to speak publicly about the FBI's
handling of the Midyear investigation. In our view, this confluence of
events inevitably increased the risk of leaks.

**B. Lack of Communication Between Comey and Department Leadership**

As we describe above, on October 27 and 28, Comey and Lynch decided not
to speak to one another, in person or by phone, about the decision to
notify Congress. Instead, Comey directed Rybicki to contact Axelrod, and
the Department decided to communicate its response entirely through
Axelrod. Comey explained that he decided to ask Rybicki to contact
Axelrod rather than speaking directly to Lynch or Yates because ".I
didn't want to jam them and I wanted to offer them the opportunity to
think about and decide whether they wanted to be engaged on it."

We asked Lynch and Yates why they did not call Comey or ask to meet with
him after Rybicki's initial notification to Axelrod. Both Lynch and
Yates told the OIG that they made an intentional strategic decision to
handle discussions about the letter to Congress through Axelrod and
Rybicki. Both Lynch and Yates explained that they were concerned that
any direct discussion with Comey---particularly any discussion in which
they told him not to send the letter---would be perceived as an attempt
to prevent him from fulfilling his "personal ethical obligation" to
notify Congress. Both stated that they were concerned that the fact of
any such direct discussions would leak and would be portrayed as
Department leadership attempting to "prevent information damaging to a
candidate from coming out" (Lynch) or "strong-arming" Comey (Yates).

Lynch and Yates also told the OIG that a significant factor in their
decision to handle communications through Rybicki and Axelrod was that
direct discussions likely would have been ineffective. Lynch said the
fact that Comey did not call her directly indicated that he did not want
a real discussion and had already made up his mind to send a letter,
because he would call her to discuss other issues that were not
resolved. Yates stated that, based on her experience with Comey, he was
likely to "push back hard" against input from Lynch or her, especially
if accepting their input meant that he had to go back to his staff and
explain that he was reversing his decision based on their input. She
told us that she believed strategically the best way to convince him not
to send the letter was to allow him to come to that conclusion through
discussions with his own staff, including Rybicki. Yates told us that
she considered Rybicki to be his "confidant" and the person that the
Department needed to convince to change Comey's mind in this situation.

Comey's reaction to the input he received as the result of Rybicki's
discussions with Axelrod suggests that these concerns were well-founded.
While Comey stated that he "welcomed" the Department's feedback, he
did not take their feedback into account when Rybicki told him that the
Department

"recommended against" the letter and thought it was "a bad idea."
When asked why he essentially ignored the advice of Department
leadership, Comey told us, "I thought the better view of it was that we
had to send the letter. They were leaving it to me essentially and I
took it, I knew that I was alone at that point in time, but my view was,
as between these two options, I disagree." Comey added that he felt that
he gave Lynch and Yates "the chance to engage," but "they didn't wish to
participate, it's up to you, basically I took that as, it's up to you.
We don't think it's a good idea. We advise against it. I honestly
thought they were taking kind of a cowardly way out."

Although Comey told us that he would not have sent the October 28 letter
had Lynch or Yates ordered him not to do it, we found no evidence that
he or Rybicki ever conveyed this to Department leadership. Both Lynch
and Yates cited Comey's description of his "personal ethical obligation"
to notify Congress and his concerns about the "survivability" of failing
to do so as reasons that they believed a direct order would be
ineffective. As described above, Axelrod told the OIG that they
considered three possible negative outcomes should Lynch order Comey not
to send to the letter: Comey could obey the order and Lynch would be
accused of obstructing Congress; Comey could ignore the order and send
the letter anyway, and Department leadership would have to fire him; and
Comey could resign. Axelrod told us, "None of those are good for
the institutions. None of those

are good for the policies and the procedures or the, sort of the
goals of keeping DOJ and FBI out of politics. None of those are good
for the AG personally."

We acknowledge that Comey, Lynch, and Yates faced difficult choices in
late October 2016. However, we found it extraordinary that Comey
assessed that it was best that the FBI Director not speak directly with
the Attorney General and Deputy Attorney General about how to best
navigate this most important decision and mitigate the resulting harms,
and that Comey's decision resulted in the Attorney General and Deputy
Attorney General concluding that it would be counterproductive to speak
directly with the FBI Director. We believe that open and candid
communication among leaders in the Department and its components is
essential for the effective functioning of the Department.

**CHAPTER ELEVEN: COMPLETION OF THE INVESTIGATION**

**I. The October 30, 2016 Search Warrant**

The FBI obtained a search warrant for the Midyear-related material on
the Weiner laptop on October 30, 2016. The search warrant authorized the
FBI to search for four categories of information on the laptop:

1.  Data and information associated with the operation, use,
    maintenance, backup, auditing, and security functions of the Subject
    Laptop.;
2.  Data and information electronically stored on the Subject Laptop
    related to communications with email accounts used by former

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton during her tenure as Secretary of
State;

1.  Data and information on the Subject Laptop that might identify the
    person or persons who accessed classified information present on the
    Subject Laptop.; and
2.  Data and information on the Subject Laptop that might identify
    activity related to a computer intrusion..

We discuss the Midyear team's decision to seek a search warrant rather
than using consent to review the laptop below. We also discuss the
narrow factual basis for the search warrant that the Midyear team
included in the application and compare the Weiner laptop with the
treatment of other devices during the main part of the Midyear
investigation.

**A. Decision Not to Seek Consent from Abedin and Weiner before Seeking
a Warrant**

Prosecutor 1 told us that there was "some discussion" of getting consent
from Weiner and Abedin to search the laptop. However, Prosecutor 1
stated that consent from both was needed and, at that point, the Midyear
team's understanding was that Weiner was inaccessible because he was at
a location where he did not have access to electronic devices.
Prosecutor 1 continued:

And.there was some concern about Weiner's attorney gladly
providing consent but wanting something from SDNY for it. And our horse
trading on conduct that was egregious and doing something for purposes
of our case didn't seem to make much sense. I think the decision was
made not to seek consent from either attorney and to get a warrant.

Prosecutor 1 told us that he believed both FBI and the Department agreed
with the decision to seek a search warrant rather than consent to access
the Weiner laptop.

Baker agreed that they did not want to try to deal with Weiner or his
attorney, but also provided an additional explanation for not seeking
consent. Baker stated:

I think we were concerned about that being too prolonged and dragged
out. I think that reflects some of our frustration with what had
happened previously in the investigation. We're trying to get consent,
and those kinds of discussions were long and drawn out. And we were just
like, screw it, we're not going to deal with that. We're just going to
get a damn search warrant. We're just not going to, we're not going to
let DOJ take us down that road. We're just going to get a search
warrant.. And in this case, we've got SDNY, and we think they'll
be aggressive and they'll go get it.

After reviewing a draft of this report, Toscas and other prosecutors
noted that SDNY played no substantive role in the October 30 search
warrant.

**B. Factual Basis of the October 30 Search Warrant Application**

The factual basis for the October 30 search warrant application, which
was prepared by the Midyear team, contained limited information about
what the NYO case agent had seen on the Weiner laptop and the importance
of that information to the Midyear investigation. The entirety of the
search warrant application that discussed what had been seen on the
Weiner laptop stated:

In executing the search of the laptop computer (the Subject Laptop)
pursuant to the search warrant issued on September 26, 2016, FBI agents
sorted the emails on the Subject Laptop to segregate emails within the
scope of the warrant from those outside of it. As a result, the FBI
reviewed non-content header information for emails on the Subject Laptop
to facilitate its search. In so doing, the FBI observed non-content
header information indicating that thousands of emails of

Weiner's then wife, Huma Abedin (Abedin), resided on the Subject

Laptop. Because Abedin's emails were outside the scope of the September
26 search warrant, the FBI did not review the content of those emails.

.The non-content header information that FBI agents reviewed on the
Subject Laptop indicates that the emails on the Subject Laptop include
emails sent and/or received by Abedin at her \@clintonemail.com account
and at a Yahoo! email account appearing to belong to Abedin, as well as
correspondence between one or both of these accounts and State
Department email accounts during and around Abedin's tenure at the State
Department. The FBI's investigation of the improper transmission and
storage of classified information on unclassified email systems and
servers has established that emails containing classified information
were transmitted through multiple email accounts used by Abedin,
including her \@clintonemail.com and Yahoo! email accounts.

The FBI's investigation determined that Abedin, using her various email
accounts, typically communicated with Clinton's

\@clintonemail.com account on a daily basis. Analysis of emails in the
FBI's possession revealed more than 4,000 work-related emails between
Abedin and Clinton from 2009 to 2013.

The FBI's investigation established that 27 email chains containing
classified information, as determined by the relevant original
classification authorities, have been transmitted through Abedin's
\@clintonemail and/or Yahoo! accounts. Out of the 27 email chains, six
email chains contained information that was classified at the Secret
level at the time the emails were sent, and information in four of those
email chains remains classified at that level now, while two email
chains contain information that is currently classified at the

Confidential level. Information in the remaining 21 email chains was
classified at the Confidential level at the time the emails were sent,
and of those 21 email chains, information in 16 of them remains
classified as Confidential.

Given the information indicating that there are thousands of Abedin's
emails located on the Subject Laptop -- including emails, during and
around Abedin's tenure at the State Department, from Abedin's
\@clintonemail.com account as well as a Yahoo! account appearing to
belong to Abedin -- and the regular email correspondence between Abedin
and Clinton, there is probable cause to believe that the Subject Laptop
contains correspondence between Abedin and Clinton during their time at
the State Department. Because it has been determined by relevant
original classification authorities that many emails were exchanged
between Abedin, using her \@clintonemail.com and/or Yahoo! accounts, and
Clinton that contain classified information, there is also probable
cause to believe that the correspondence between them located on the
Subject Laptop contains classified information..

Noticeably absent from the search warrant application prepared by the
Midyear team is both any mention that the NYO agent had seen Clinton's
emails on the laptop and any mention of the potential presence of
BlackBerry emails from early in Clinton's tenure. In explaining the
absence of this information, Strzok stated:

I think what we were trying to do was establish as tightly as we could
the fact that we believed, because I think the basis of the probable
cause was that there was classified information on there.. I think it
as that narrative was not designed to tell the whole story. That
narrative was to, designed to demonstrate to the magistrate that we have
probable cause that there was evidence of a crime on there.

We also asked Prosecutor 1 about the factual statement of probable cause
outlined in the search warrant. Prosecutor 1 stated:

The probable cause was basically that Huma Abedin had an email
account. That email account communicated with email accounts where
classified information was there. Classified information made it into
Huma's email accounts. We believe information from those email accounts
is on this computer belonging to her husband based upon whatever we
could describe about what that agent saw, which we had to characterize
very carefully, and so that what tethered it to the computer was
basically what an agent saw doing a search warrant from another case.
That's the probable cause.

We asked Prosecutor 1 if there was any discussion of putting in
information relating to the BlackBerry emails from early in Clinton's
tenure. Prosecutor 1 stated:

I don't think so. If it would have helped the probable cause, I would
have put it in. I don't think we had.strong enough basis to do that,
or I would have put it in I'm sure. Because it, I mean we would have,
anything that we could have put in there that was true and would have
bolstered the probable cause, we would have put in.

We also reviewed the factual basis of the October 30 search warrant
application with the NYO case agent for the Weiner investigation. The
case agent told us that each of the facts related to the Weiner laptop
that were included in the search warrant application were known to him
"within a day or two" of September 26.

We asked Comey for his reaction to the statement that "every fact in
the October 30 search warrant was known to the FBI at the highest
levels---at least to the Deputy Director level---on September 28th."
Comey responded, "My reaction is it likely should have moved faster and
I'd want to know, to answer this I'm asking, but what would their motive
be to delay?"

**C. Difference in Approach to Devices during Main Investigation**

As noted previously, Comey's decision on October 27 to have the FBI seek
a search warrant for the Weiner laptop generated discussion among the
Midyear team about how that approach differed from the approach that the
Midyear team agreed upon and took during the investigation, namely to
only seek Clinton's personal electronic devices and not to seek the
personal electronic devices of any of her aides. In addition, in
drafting the search warrant application for the Weiner laptop, a
discussion occurred regarding the scope of the requested search warrant
and whether it should be limited to emails between Clinton and Abedin,
or whether it should include all of Abedin's emails.

Emails from the night of October 29 show that Baker expressed concerns
that the draft search warrant request was too narrow. Specifically, in
an email at 9:13 p.m. to FBI Attorney 1, Strzok, and Anderson, Baker
stated, "The main question I sic have right now is why we are only
seeking access to emails between Huma and Clinton. Based on the facts
set forth about Huma mishandling classified information on all of her
accounts, it seems to me there is probable cause to look at all of
her emails no matter who is the other party. Am I misreading the scope
of the warrant or the strength of the probable cause?" Strzok
responded to Baker's email at 9:28 p.m., stating:

I think the primary deficiency in trying to go after Huma's own
communications is that Huma's role and expertise was far more
administrative in nature than that of the other close aides to
Clinton. That is, when it came to classified information, she was
primarily a conduit to/from others to Clinton, not a generator of such
information/discussion on her own. Whereas Sullivan or Mills had
substantive (and sometimes classified) discussions on their own absent
Clinton's participation, Abedin's were largely as an administrative
conduit to the Sec'y. Thus, it's more challenging to articulate an
expectation at the level of probable cause that we'd expect to find
classified in her discussions not involving Clinton. We can't
exclude it, but it's challenging.

FBI Attorney 1 responded to Strzok's email at 9:55 p.m., stating,
"That's right, Pete. Plus, we can't say she mishandled on all of her
accounts. Of the 27 classified emails, 26 were on her \@clintonemail.com
account and one was Yahoo. We also cannot say for certain that the 27
classified emails are on this particular device, which also weakens our
argument generally." In response, Baker sent an email at 10:18 p.m.,
stating, "There is probable cause to believe that Huma used her
email accounts to mishandle classified information. I just don't
understand why that is not enough to look at all her emails..
Would you please discuss with DOJ?" Baker told us that he believed the
FBI should seek the authority to review all of Abedin's emails on the
laptop, instead of just emails between Abedin and Clinton.

FBI Attorney 1 told us that she recalled Baker "wanting the search
warrant to be broader" and in an email on October 29 FBI Attorney 1
stated that Baker's "point is there could be relevant emails that are
not between Huma and HRC---particularly regarding intent." At 11:06 p.m.
on October 29, FBI Attorney 1 sent Prosecutor 1 and Prosecutor 2 an
email informing them of Baker's concern and adding, "I understand that
the scope of our consensual searches has been limited to emails with
Clinton, but the purpose of our investigation was to look for
classified information that transited the server, which would include
Huma's \@clintonemail. I honestly can't remember how we treated those
when we got consent for the second server, and I don't have the
letter in front of me." Prosecutor 1 responded at 11:12 p.m., "We
did not look through all of Huma's emails before (we searched for
Clinton's addresses but did not go through all of her emails). We can
discuss but that seems like a pretty big push (we only use examples of
communiciations with Clinton to establish probable cause for
793 offenses)." Five minutes later, at 11:17 p.m., FBI Attorney 1
responded, "I honestly couldn't remember how we treated Huma
\@clintonemail emails before given sic. Sounds like limiting the
search to Clinton communications is consistent."

FBI Attorney 1 told the OIG that the Department "didn't believe that we
had the probable cause to, to be broader than that." Baker stated
that someone at either the Department or SDNY "pushed back and said no,
we don't have probable cause for that."^[^171^](#fn171){#fnref171
.footnote-ref}^

We asked the prosecutors about this issue. Prosecutor 1 told us that he
felt "we needed to treat Huma like we treated her earlier on in the
investigation." Prosecutor 1 told us that it did not make sense to
"expand the bounds" of what they had done before when reviewing the
Weiner laptop. Prosecutor 2 also noted this, stating:

And then there is also the issue of like we didn't look at everyone's
emails over the course of this investigation. We had Huma's, some of
like Huma's clintonemail.com emails on the server. And we never got
consent or a search warrant to look through Huma's email on the server
because, you know, the judgment was made that like that was not so
significant to the investigation. So, I think from the DOJ perspective,
we were kind of confused why this was such a significant development.

During this debate with FBI on October 29, Prosecutor 1 sent an email to
Toscas stating, "Worried that Baker and higher ups over there (or people
in the chain) are going to say DOJ was standing in their way. It just
seems to me that they are pushing the bounds here all of a sudden (when
they didn't do so before)." We asked Prosecutor 1 about this email.
Prosecutor 1 stated that part of his concern was frustration at the FBI
for requesting the search warrant be completed immediately, yet trying
to suggest major changes after it was substantially completed.
Prosecutor 1 stated that he also felt "it didn't make a lot of sense"
for the purpose of probable cause "to talk about hypothetical
conversations that could have" occurred "in order to expand the bounds
of what we're trying to do with the search
warrant."^[^172^](#fn172){#fnref172 .footnote-ref}^

**II. Lynch-Comey Meeting on October 31**

On Monday, October 31, Lynch requested a private conversation with Comey
after the regularly scheduled Monday morning meeting between the
Department and the FBI. Yates told us that she and Lynch had talked
about this meeting beforehand and that Lynch told Yates that Lynch
planned to make two points to

Comey: (1) the October 28th letter "was a blunder," and (2) that Comey
and the

FBI needed to process the Weiner laptop "as fast as you can."

We asked Comey about this meeting. Comey stated:

So the two of us went into the AG's private office.and I went over to
sit in a chair and she closed the door and turned around and started
walking at me with her head down and her arms out and came up to me
because I'm so ridiculously tall and pressed her head, her face against
my solar plexus and wrapped her arms around me and hugged me and then I
kind of awkwardly---I'm not a hugger because I'm a giraffe---and so I
kind of patted the Attorney General's back and then the embrace---she
broke the embrace and then said, "I just wanted to give you a hug."

And she went over and sat down. And then.she said, "How are you
doing?" I said, "I'm doing okay." I said, "Look this is really bad, but
the alternative is worse." And then she said, "Yeah would they feel
better if it had leaked on November 6th?" And I just said, "Exactly
Loretta." Because I hadn't made the disclosure to Congress because of
the leaks---the prospect of leaks, but it actually consoled me because
really you're not that important because even if you hadn't sent a
letter to Congress, which was the right thing to do, it probably would
have leaked anyway that you were going for a search warrant on this
stuff and she obviously saw it the same way and said, "Right, would they
feel better if it had leaked on November 6th?" I think she said. And I
said, "Exactly."

And then she said a nice thing, "I hope you're holding up." And then she
said---so we get up and start walking to the door. She's in front of me
and then she turns around and says, "Try to look beat up." And so then
she opens the door, we walk out, her staff is all out in the hallway and
I walk out.

And then somebody puts it out within moments that the Attorney General
had taken me aside to give me a woodshedding or something; it was in the
media, I think, that morning. So she and I never spoke about that again,
but I reasonably understood that. Her saying you did the right thing,
and even if you hadn't sent the letter, it would have come out anyway
and that would've been even worse and so that's---I think that's the end
of the story.

We also asked Lynch about this meeting. Lynch told us that the reason
she called the one-on-one meeting with Comey was primarily because she
"wanted to talk to him about" leaks and she was concerned that Comey
"didn't want to talk about it in front of a larger group." Lynch stated:

We went into a smaller room.. And I recall, we were both sitting
down. And I recall saying we have to talk about this letter and the
aftermath of it.. I don't recall my exact words, but I remember
saying, you know, I know that you were aware that I did not think you
should do this. But, it is done now, and we have to deal with the
aftermath of it.. And I said.this has not followed what was at
least conveyed to me you thought you were going to do. And.I made the
point that it was immediately described as the investigation was
reopened, the full investigation was reopened.

And he said, you know, I was very clear.I was very careful not to say
that. And I had heard over the weekend that he had been surprised or
disappointed, or perhaps both, that the letter was being characterized
in that way. Because that was not what he wanted to say, not what he
intended to say. And I said, I understand that that wasn't your
intention, but that's how it was taken.. I said, in many ways, it's
the exact opposite of what you wanted to have happen. And I said, and I
think it's caused a huge problem for the Department because we have this
perception now that we are essentially trying to harm one of the
candidates..

And I raised the possibility. I said I think you ought to think about
sending another letter, a clarifying letter. You've already done this
now. You have created a misimpression as to what is going on.. You
need to clarify this and say that essentially you want to make it clear
that this is not a reopening of the investigation. That should be
conveyed in there somewhere.

And he said, how would you phrase that? And I said, you know, I have not
put pen to paper. I have not wordsmithed this. And I said, and I don't
think it should come from me. It needs to come from you because you gave
the initial letter. I said if it comes from me, then we are essentially
talking about internal DOJ fights and disagreements and everything. And
that's throwing more into the public arena that shouldn't be there. He
said, I agree with you on that. He said I'll think about that. I'll
think about that.

...At some point, I said it's clear to me that, that we're going to
have to do some statement at the end of the forensic analysis. It could
be part of that. Or you could do it today. I said, but I really think
you need to clarify this. And he said, I hear you, I hear you. Which is
a phrase that Comey uses a lot, I hear you. And he said, I will give
that a great deal of thought. And he said, my concern is, and again, I
don't recall the exact words, but he said I have a concern that it would
do more harm than good at this point. And I said, okay, well let's think
about what it would look like.

The other issue I raised with him was.I said, look, I've known you
for a long time. You and I have been in the Department a long time. I
said, my view is you would never have done something like this if you
didn't feel tremendous pressure to do it. And I said, and I don't
understand that pressure. I said, but, it was conveyed to me that you
were very concerned about leaks, specifically. And I said, I can only
assume that you were thinking of leaks that would have been of this
information in a much, much worse way. And he said, you're right.

You're exactly right about that.

Now, I knew that the laptop had been handled in a case out of New York.
And so I said, you know, we have to talk about the New York
office.and the concern that both you and I have expressed about leaks
in the past. And I said, do you think that this was the right way to
deal with the issue, the concern about leaks?. He didn't have much of
a response. But we were having a conversation.. And I said, you know,
I've talked, you and I have talked about that before.. McCabe and
I have talked about them before..

And then I said, now, we've got to talk about the New York office in
general. And he said yes. And I said we both work with them. We both
know them. We both, you know, think highly of them. I said, but this has
become a problem. And he said, and he said to me that it had become
clear to him, he didn't say over the course of what investigation or
whatever, he said it's clear to me that there is a cadre of senior
people in New York who have a deep and visceral hatred of Secretary
Clinton. And he said it is, it is deep. It's, and he said, he said it
was surprising to him or stunning to him.

You know, I didn't get the impression he was agreeing with it at all, by
the way. But he was saying it did exist, and it was hard to manage
because these were agents that were very, very senior, or had even had
timed out and were staying on, and therefore did not really feel under
pressure from headquarters or anything to that effect. And I said, you
know, I'm aware of that.. I said, I wasn't aware it was to this level
and this depth that you're talking about, but I said I'm sad to say that
that does not surprise me.

And he made a comment about, you know, you understand that. A lot of
people don't understand that. You, you get that issue. I said, I get
that issue. I said I'm, I'm just troubled that this issue, meaning the,
the New York agent issue and leaks, I am just troubled that this issue
has put us where we are today with respect to this laptop.

And he said again I hear you, I hear you. I will think about that. I
will consider what to do. He said, but he said again, I'm concerned that
another letter right now that isn't tied to a resolution of the
forensics would just be pouring more, he didn't say more fuel on the
fire, but that was the phraseology, something like that that he used.
And I said, all right. I said, well, let me know what you decide about
whether to do something else or not, particularly as we go through the
process of finding things out.

Lynch told us that she was "sure" she "asked Comey if he was okay"
and that she may have hugged him because she "often did." Lynch also
stated that as they departed the room she joked with Comey and said
"something like of course you're going to look like I beat you up."
Overall, Lynch described the conversation as a "friendly" but "tough
conversation" given the "serious and significant issues" involved.

Lynch's Chief of Staff stated that Lynch told her about the conversation
with Comey afterwards. Lynch's Chief of Staff stated:

Lynch said the Director had expressed that he needed to send the
letter because he was very concerned about leaks, that it was going to
leak out anyway that they had found these emails in relation to the
Weiner investigation. She may have told me something else, but I don't
remember. I remember that being the big thing that he had focused on.

We also reviewed McCord's notes of a meeting she attended with Lynch on
October 31, after Lynch's meeting with Comey, in which the Midyear
investigation was discussed. The notes reflect that Lynch stated the
following:

.good vehicle for more clarifying stmt. need to correct
misimpressions out there

Told Director this morning and he wanted to think about it

---could recap where we were at end of last week and talk about
process w/out details of what we're finding

---will cont. our review and take approp. inv. steps

---should come from Comey to clarify what he said Friday..

III. **FBI Review of Weiner Laptop Emails**

Midyear agents obtained a copy of the Weiner laptop from NYO immediately
after the search warrant was signed on October 30. The laptop was taken
directly to Quantico where the FBI's Operational Technology Division
(OTD) began processing the laptop. The Lead Analyst told us that given
the volume of emails on the laptop and the difficulty with
de-duplicating the emails that "at least for the first few days, the
scale of what we're doing seemed really, really big." Strzok told us
that OTD was able "to do some amazing things" to "rapidly de-duplicate"
the emails on the laptop, which significantly lowered the number of
emails that the Midyear team would have to individually review. Strzok
stated that only after that technological breakthrough did he begin to
think it was "possible we might wrap up before the election."

FBI leadership, including Comey, was briefed on an almost daily basis
during the review process. The Lead Analyst told us that he recalled
briefing Comey on Friday, November 4, stating:

I told Comey, I said.I think there's a possibility we may be able
to get through this before the end of the weekend. So he said if you
think you can do it, you should try to. So that's what we did. We
brought in, we basically put all hands on deck for that Saturday.

The Midyear team flagged all potentially work-related emails encountered
during the review process and compared those to emails that they had
previously reviewed in other datasets. Any work-related emails that were
unique, meaning that they did not appear in any other dataset, were
individually reviewed by the Lead Analyst, Strzok, and FBI Attorney 1
for evidentiary value.

Analysts on the Midyear team subsequently drafted a document summarizing
the review of the Weiner laptop entitled, "Anthony Weiner Laptop Review
for Communications Pertinent to Midyear Exam." This document, dated
November 15, 2016, showed that the full image of the laptop contained
approximately 1,355,980 items, or files. According to the document, FBI
OTD initially extracted approximately 350,000 emails from the laptop and
then approximately 344,000 BlackBerry backup
files.^[^173^](#fn173){#fnref173 .footnote-ref}^ The FBI determined that
4 of the 13 BlackBerry backups "were assessed to belong to Abedin." The
remaining 9 BlackBerry backups were associated with Weiner. The FBI only
reviewed emails to or from Clinton during the period in which she was
Secretary of State, and not emails from Abedin to other parties or
emails outside that period. Analyst 1 stated, "I had very strict
instructions that all I was allowed to do within the case was look for
Hillary Clinton emails, because that was the scope of our work."
Utilizing various searches targeting Clinton's emails, the FBI reviewed
in full "approximately 48,982" items on the Weiner laptop.

The FBI ultimately "identified 13 confirmed classified email chains, the
content of which was duplicative of emails previously recovered during
the investigation." None of these emails were marked classified, but 4
of the 13 were classified as Secret at the time sent and 9 were
classified Confidential at the time sent. The FBI determined that Abedin
forwarded two of the confirmed classified emails to
Weiner.^[^174^](#fn174){#fnref174 .footnote-ref}^ The FBI reviewed 6,827
emails that were either to or from Clinton and assessed 3,077 of those
emails to be "potentially work-related." The FBI analysis of the review
noted that "because metadata was largely absent, the emails could
not be completely, automatically de-duplicated or evaluated against
prior emails recovered during the investigation" and therefore the FBI
could not determine how many of the potentially work-related emails were
duplicative of emails previously obtained in the Midyear investigation.

III. **Agent 1 Instant Messages from November 1**

On November 1, Agent 1 and an FBI agent uninvolved in the Midyear
investigation exchanged the following instant messages on the FBI's
computer network. The sender of each message is identified after the
timestamp.

8:31 a.m., Uninvolved Agent: "A horrible shit sandwich. Still no grand
jury I imagine. So, you find Huma lied; BFD. No one at DoJ is going to
prosecute."

8:33 a.m., Agent 1: "Rog -- noone is going to prosecute even if we
find unique classified. Grand jury story was inaccurate -- 50+ GJ
subpoenas and 2703d issued,"

8:37 a.m., Agent 1: ".We only had several warrants and alot of
consent searches on media. I would have liked to use warrants for all
because the consent agreements had limited scope. Reasonable scope, but
I don't like to stand on the lawn and have the occupants throw out the
evidence to us."

We asked Agent 1 about these messages. Agent 1 told us that this was
another example of a friend reaching out to him about the status of the
Midyear investigation. Agent 1 continued:

I think that similar to what I've said before, I think this is me
venting or complaining in a vein of, you know, but I have, I have
nothing to substantiate. I don't have a statement. I don't have a, I
don't have an action that someone wouldn't prosecute it if, if we found
it.

We asked Agent 1 about his expectation at the time of what would be
found on the Weiner laptop and how that could impact the Midyear
investigation. Agent 1 stated:

I think my feeling at the time was there was a really good chance we'd
find emails we hadn't seen before.. That there might not be something
that could potentially be classified.but.would it be so much
different than what we had already seen? I, my impression would probably
be no.

**V. Comey Letter to Congress on November 6**

On the afternoon of November 3, the FBI began drafting what ultimately
became Comey's letter to Congress announcing that the FBI had completed
its review of the emails to or from Clinton that were on the Weiner
laptop. That work was completed very early on November 6. Later that
same day, Comey sent his second letter to Congress, which we provide as
Attachment F. This letter stated:

I write to supplement my October 28, 2016 letter that notified you the
FBI would be taking additional investigative steps with respect to
former Secretary of State Clinton's use of a personal email server.
Since my letter, the FBI investigative team has been working around the
clock to process and review a large volume of emails from a device
obtained in connection with an unrelated criminal investigation. During
that process, we reviewed all of the communications that were to or from
Hillary Clinton while she was Secretary of State.

Based on our review, we have not changed our conclusions that we
expressed in July with respect to Secretary Clinton.

I am very grateful to the professionals at the FBI for doing an
extraordinary amount of high-quality work in a short period of time.

Comey told us that he met with the Midyear team after they had finished
the review of the emails on the Weiner laptop and "went through what
they had done, what they had found, and their conclusion was, it does
not change our view with respect to Hillary Clinton." Comey stated that
there was "more work to be done with respect to" Abedin and Weiner to
understand how the emails ended up on Weiner's computer, but that the
review was complete with respect to Clinton. Comey continued, "And then
I said, okay, you know, basically convince me you've done it well." Once
convinced, Comey stated, "I said, okay now we're done, we should notify
Congress that we are done. And then we set to work on that."

Comey stated that Steinbach opposed the idea of a second letter. Comey
explained:

And Steinbach's view was, I just think it's too late that, as I
recall it.but that we've created a storm and if you try to undo the
storm now, you'll simply feed the storm more or something---so words to
that effect. I said, look I respect that view, but I think you're wrong.
I think having spoken, that led to us having to speak, having spoken we
need to, in fairness, say that we're done. You've done it well, you've
been able to do it in time. So then we shared that also with DOJ, got
feedback and then sent that letter. And again the goal there was to be
as fair as possible while still accomplishing the goal of telling them
that we've finished with respect to her.

Steinbach told us that he could not recall the specifics of the debate
about the November 6 letter, but stated, "I think maybe the November 6th
one I was thinking look, it's already done. Just let it, let it go, let
it die. I can't remember."

The Lead Analyst told us that he raised objections to the November 6
letter during discussions with Comey. The Lead Analyst stated:

I said I, I could understand the first statement because we were
reopening an investigation. We were correcting the record. But I said I
don't agree that, that this time we have any obligation to do that
because the investigation isn't done. We have additional investigative
steps that are going to happen. We're not closed in the sense of being
closed. We may have, we may have come to a, a position of understanding
about what's on this laptop. But to me, that same obligation, which is
to me what drove us to make the first statement, does not exist now.

The Lead Analyst told us that the further investigative steps needed to
complete the investigation included at least a "malware analysis" to
examine the laptop for intrusion and a re-interview of Abedin. Abedin
was in fact re-interviewed by the FBI on January 6, 2017. With regard to
the malware analysis, the Lead Analyst explained:

The way I explain this in my thinking is, again, from my
counterintelligence perspective, one of the key questions you're
trying to answer to any of these circumstances, especially when you've
been confirmed that classified information is resident on a device that
it shouldn't be, is did that device get compromised by anyone. That's a
part of the equation of was this of significant or negative impact to
U.S. national security. If it's simply on Weiner's laptop and that's
where it ended, then that's one thing. It's another thing if through
this, their actions that got on Weiner's laptop and a foreign power
obtained those classified, that's a separate question. So to me that's
not a, that's not an insignificant aspect of this that was still
completely unresolved at the time.

The Lead Analyst stated, "Then ultimately, the Director looked at me,
and.he thanked me and thanked everybody for our candor, as always.
And he said, but I have decided we're going to do it. And we're going to
make it, you know, the statement and, that's kind of it."

At 7:52 p.m. on November 5, Page sent a text message to Strzok that
stated, "I don't want to make a statement anymore." Strzok responded at
7:58 p.m., stating, in part, "Yeah I don't either. We're kind of out of
the news cycle, let's leave it that way." At 8:11 a.m. on November 6,
Page sent another text message to Strzok that stated, "I still don't
know that we should make this statement." Strzok immediately responded,
"I don't either. Imsg?"

After being shown these text messages, Strzok stated that he thought the
decision to send the November 6 letter was "easier" then the decision
about the October 28 letter. However, Strzok stated that he was
concerned that every time the FBI acted it "invigorated the news
cycle." We also asked Strzok and Page about their use of iMessage, a
built-in instant message service on Apple devices. As described in more
detail in Chapter Twelve, Strzok and Page told us that they mostly used
iMessage and personal email for personal use. However, Strzok told us
could not exclude the possibility that he sent work-related information
over iMessage. Similarly, Page told us that references to these other
forums reflected "mostly personal use" as opposed to using them for work
purposes. However, she stated that she and Strzok sometimes used these
forums for work-related discussions due to the technical limitations of
FBI-issued phones.

Unlike the October 28 letter, the FBI sent a draft copy of the November
6 letter to the Department and the Department participated meaningfully
in the drafting process. Axelrod stated that he "insisted" upon seeing
the letter and he, along with Toscas and Associate Deputy Attorney
General Scott Schools, provided comments and edits.

**PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY**

BLANK
=====

**CHAPTER TWELVE: TEXT MESSAGES, INSTANT MESSAGES, USE OF PERSONAL
EMAIL, AND ALLEGED IMPROPER DISCLOSURES OF NON-PUBLIC INFORMATION**

This Chapter discusses text messages from FBI-issued mobile devices and
instant messages exchanged on FBI systems that raised concerns of
potential bias. We describe key text messages and instant messages we
identified during our review, as well as explanations for these messages
that the involved employees offered during their OIG interviews. We also
identified instances where FBI employees, including Comey and Strzok,
used personal email accounts to conduct official government business.
Lastly, we discuss allegations that Department and FBI employees
improperly disclosed non-public information.

**I. Text Messages and Instant Messages**

During the course of our review, we requested and received text messages
from FBI-issued mobile devices and instant messages exchanged on the
FBINet and SCINet Lync applications for FBI personnel involved in the
Midyear investigation.^[^175^](#fn175){#fnref175 .footnote-ref}^ We also
requested text messages for Department personnel involved in the Midyear
investigation, but were informed that the Department does not retain
text messages for more than 5 to 7 days.^[^176^](#fn176){#fnref176
.footnote-ref}^ The OIG previously expressed concerns in a 2015 report
about the text message retention practices of the Department's four law
enforcement components, and we recommend that ODAG consider taking steps
to improve the retention and monitoring of text messages
Department-wide.^[^177^](#fn177){#fnref177 .footnote-ref}^

After receiving FBI text messages and instant messages responsive to
keywords we provided to the FBI, we identified messages for certain FBI
personnel that raised concerns about potential bias. We then obtained
all text messages and instant messages for those FBI personnel for the
entire period of the Midyear investigation through July 1, 2017, to
capture post-election discussions. We identified communications from
five different FBI employees that we discuss in this
section.^[^178^](#fn178){#fnref178 .footnote-ref}^

First, we identified text messages exchanged between DAD Peter Strzok
and Lisa Page, Special Counsel to former Deputy Director Andrew McCabe,
on their FBIissued cell phones. These text messages included political
opinions about candidates and issues involved in the 2016 presidential
election, including statements of hostility toward then candidate Trump
and statements of support for candidate Clinton. Several of their text
messages also appeared to mix political opinions with discussions about
the Midyear and Russia investigations, raising a question as to whether
Strzok's and Page's political opinions may have affected investigative
decisions. In addition to being involved in the Midyear and Russia
investigations, both Page and Strzok were also briefly assigned to the
investigation conducted by Special Counsel Robert Mueller III.

Next, we identified instant messages exchanged on FBINet involving Agent
1 and Agent 5. As noted previously, Agent 1 was assigned to the Midyear
investigative team and was one of the four case agents. Agent 5 was
assigned to the Midyear filter team. We discussed in Chapter Five a
number of Agent 1's instant messages that expressed opinions that were
critical of the conduct and quality of the Midyear investigation. In
addition to those messages, we identified two instant message exchanges
involving Agent 1 that appeared to combine a discussion of politics with
a discussion of the Midyear investigation. We also identified instant
messages between Agent 1 and Agent 5 that expressed support for
candidate Clinton and hostility toward first candidate and then
President Trump.

Finally, we identified instant messages sent on FBINet by FBI Attorney
2. FBI Attorney 2 was assigned to the Midyear investigation, the Russia
investigation, and the Special Counsel investigation. We found instant
messages in which FBI Attorney 2 discussed political issues, including
three instant message exchanges that raised concerns of potential bias.

In this section, we describe key text messages and instant messages we
identified during our review, as well as explanations for these messages
that the employees offered during their OIG interviews.

**A. Text Messages between Lisa Page and Peter Strzok**

Peter Strzok is an experienced counterintelligence agent who was
promoted to Deputy Assistant Director (DAD) of the Espionage Section in
September 2016.

As described in the previous chapters, Strzok was assigned to the
Midyear investigation in August 2015 and was responsible for supervising
the investigation on a daily basis. Page was named counsel to then
Deputy Director Andrew McCabe in February 2016, and served as his
liaison to the Midyear investigative team from February 2016 forward.

In addition to their roles in the Midyear investigation, both Page and
Strzok were involved in the FBI investigation into the Russian
government's efforts to interfere in the 2016 presidential
election.^[^179^](#fn179){#fnref179 .footnote-ref}^ Strzok was assigned
to lead the Russia investigation in late July
2016.^[^180^](#fn180){#fnref180 .footnote-ref}^ Page also worked on the
Russia investigation, and told us that she served the same liaison
function as she did in the Midyear investigation. Both Page and Strzok
accepted invitations to work on the Special Counsel staff in 2017. Page
told the OIG that she accepted a 45-day temporary duty assignment but
returned to work in the Deputy Director's office at the FBI on or around
July 15, 2017. Strzok was removed from the Special Counsel's
investigation on approximately July 28, 2017, and returned to the FBI in
another position, after the OIG informed the DAG and Special Counsel of
the text messages discussed in this report on July 27, 2017.

As noted above, after finding responsive text messages between Page and
Strzok that appeared to intermingle political comments with discussions
of the

Midyear investigation, the OIG obtained from the FBI all text messages
between Strzok and Page from their FBI-issued phones for the entire
period of the Clinton email server investigation as well as the period
of the Russia investigation during which Strzok and Page worked on it.
The OIG received more than 40,000 unique text messages between Strzok
and Page in response to these requests.^[^181^](#fn181){#fnref181
.footnote-ref}[^182^](#fn182){#fnref182 .footnote-ref}^ The FBI did not
provide any text messages for the period from December 15, 2016, to May
17, 2017, because of issues with the data collection and preservation
software used on the FBI's Samsung S5 mobile devices. However, OIG
forensic agents obtained the phones used by Strzok and Page, and
recovered a large number of the text messages from this "gap" period.
For the gap period, the OIG recovered 9,311 text messages from Strzok's
phone and 10,760 text messages from Page's phone, some of which were
duplicates or text messages exchanged with other people. Although the
number and frequency of text messages is generally consistent with
previous time periods, we cannot definitively say that our forensic
recovery captured every text message exchanged between Page and Strzok
during the gap period.^[^183^](#fn183){#fnref183 .footnote-ref}^

The text messages between Page and Strzok covered a wide range of
topics.

For example, we identified a large number of routine work-related
communications. Many of the text messages were of a personal nature,
including discussions about their families, medical issues, and daily
events, and reflected that Strzok and Page were communicating on their
FBI-issued phones as part of an extramarital affair. We found that this
relationship was relevant to the frequency and candid nature of the text
messages and their use of FBI-issued phones to communicate. Some of
these text messages expressed political opinions about candidates and
issues involved in the 2016 presidential election, including statements
of hostility toward candidate Trump and statements of support for
candidate Clinton.

We identified three categories of text messages that raised concerns
about potential bias in FBI investigations. The first were text messages
of a political nature commenting on Trump and Clinton. We specifically
highlight these text messages because Strzok and Page played important
roles in investigations involving both Trump and Clinton, and the
exchange of these text messages on an FBI-issued device potentially
created an appearance of bias. The second category we identified were
text messages that combined expressions of political sentiments with a
discussion of the Midyear investigation, potentially indicating or
creating the appearance that investigative decisions were impacted by
bias or improper considerations. The third category raised similar
questions with respect to the Russia investigation. We also include a
fourth category of text messages that have received significant public
attention. These messages are included to provide context and further
explanation as to their meaning, and do not necessarily implicate
potential bias in either the Midyear or Russia investigations. Examples
of these four categories of text messages are discussed
below.^[^184^](#fn184){#fnref184 .footnote-ref}^ We also include
explanations provided by Page and Strzok during their OIG interviews
about these text messages.

**1. Text Messages Commenting on Trump or Clinton**

In this section, we highlight examples of text messages of a political
nature commenting on Trump and Clinton. We include explanations provided
by Page and Strzok about their use of FBI-issued phones in general and
their use of FBI-issued phones for political discussions. The sender of
each text message is identified after the date.

- August 16, 2015, Strzok: "Bernie Sanders is an idiot like Trump.
    Figure they cancel each other out."^[^185^](#fn185){#fnref185
    .footnote-ref}^
- February 12, 2016, Page: "I'm no prude, but I'm really appalled by
    this. So you don't have to go looking (in case you hadn't heard),
    Trump called him the p-word. The man has no dignity or class. He
    simply cannot be president. With a Slur for Ted Cruz, Donald Trump
    Further Splits Voters http://nyti.ms/1XoICkO."
- February 12, 2016, Strzok: "Oh, Trump's abysmal. I keep hoping
    the charade will end and people will just dump him. The problem,
    then, is Rubio will likely lose to Cruz. The Republican party is in
    utter shambles. When was the last competitive ticket they offered?"
     March 3, 2016, Page: "God trump is a loathsome human."  March 3,
    2016, Strzok: "Omg Trump's an idiot.
- March 3, 2016, Page: "He's awful."
- March 3, 2016, Strzok: "God Hillary should win 100,000,000-0."
- March 3, 2016, Page: "Also did you hear Trump make a comment
    about the size of his d\*ck earlier? This man cannot be president."
- March 12, 2016: Page forwarded an article about a "far right"
    candidate in Texas, stating, "What the f is wrong with people?"
    Strzok replied, "That Texas article is depressing as hell. But
    answers how we could end up with President trump."
- March 16, 2016, Page: "I cannot believe Donald Trump is likely to be
    an actual, serious candidate for president."
- June 11, 2016, Strzok: "They fully deserve to go, and demonstrate
    the absolute bigoted nonsense of Trump."
- July 18, 2016, Page: "...Donald Trump is an enormous d\*uche."
- July 19, 2016, Page: "Trump barely spoke, but the first thing out of
    his mouth was 'we're going to win soooo big.' The whole thing is
    like living in a bad dream."
- July 21, 2016, Strzok: "Trump is a disaster. I have no idea how
    destabilizing his Presidency would be."
- August 26, 2016, Strzok: "Just went to a southern Virginia Walmart.
    I could SMELL the Trump support.."
- September 26, 2016, Page: Page sent an article to Strzok entitled,
    "Why Donald Trump Should Not Be President," stating, "Did you read
    this? It's scathing. And I'm scared."
- October 19, 2016, Strzok: "I am riled up. Trump is a fucking idiot,
    is unable to provide a coherent answer."
- November 3, 2016, Page: "The nyt probability numbers are dropping
    every day. I'm scared for our organization."
- November 3, 2016, Strzok: "Jill Stein and moron Gary Johnson
    are F'ing everything up, too."
- November 7, 2016, Strzok: Referencing an article entitled "A victory
    by Mr. Trump remains possible," Strzok stated, "OMG THIS IS F\*CKING
    TERRIFYING."
- November 13, 2016, Page: "I bought all the president's men. Figure I
    needed to brush up on watergate."^[^186^](#fn186){#fnref186
    .footnote-ref}^

Both Strzok and Page agreed to multiple voluntary interviews with the
OIG regarding, among other things, their text messages. The OIG asked
Strzok and Page each to comment in general on the text messages. Strzok
explained that the text messages reflected his "personal opinion talking
to a friend." He stated that ingrained in FBI culture was a "bright and
inviolable line between what you think personally and belief and the
conduct of your official business," and that the political opinions he
expressed in the text messages "never transited into the official realm.
In any way. Not in discussions, not in acts." Strzok acknowledged that
"it was dumb to do that all on a government device," but distinguished
his private exchanges with Page from a more public forum where
expressing such views might call into question the integrity of an FBI
investigation. When questioned about the possibility that exchanges on
his government device could be hacked, obtained by the media, or
otherwise exposed to the public, he acknowledged that "I can envision a
number of scenarios" where it could impact an

investigation.

Strzok stated most people would have no idea of his partisan affiliation
and that "it was a point of pride on Midyear that we absolutely
conducted that investigation and pursued the truth in a manner that was
protected from bias or influence and was simply apolitical." He further
stated, "I did not either in Midyear or any other case act in a
vacuum.. I had subordinates, I had peers, I had supervisors," and
that none of these people would say that he had acted in a biased manner
in carrying out his official duties.

Page told us that these text messages reflected her personal opinions
regarding candidate Trump's fitness to be president and her preference
for Clinton, but that she did not allow her political views to impact
investigative steps on the Midyear investigation. She stated, "Because I
was on the Clinton investigation, I actually felt extremely constrained
from talking to anyone about politics at all.. And so, Pete being a
good friend, it was in a way a, like a safe place to sort of have a
conversation about what was.the normal sort of news of the day
because.we both knew that we weren't, it wasn't impacting anything
that we were doing." She pointed out that many of the text messages in
question were sent after the Midyear investigation was effectively
concluded on July 5, 2016, at which point she said she personally felt
less constrained to express an opinion. Page stated that she was
"responsible for no single decision at all with respect to the case,"
but that her role was rather to communicate information between FBI
executive leadership and the investigative team. She also said she was
not the sole source of information to executive leadership.

When asked about using her FBI-issued phone for these exchanges, Page
told us, "The predominant reason that we communicated on our work
phones was because we were trying to keep our affair a secret from our
spouses." Page also said, "I guess I didn't feel like I was doing
anything wrong. I'm an American. We have the First Amendment. I'm
entitled to an opinion.. I saw it as, I still see it as so separate
from the investigative activity we were taking in the, in Midyear that I
didn't, didn't really think about it, to be honest with you."

**2. Text Messages Discussing Political Sentiments and the Midyear
Investigation**

In this section, we highlight examples of text messages that appear to
combine expressions of political sentiments with discussion of the
Midyear investigation. We provide background and context where possible
to assist in understanding the text messages. We also include the
explanations provided by Page and Strzok about these text messages.

**February 24, 2016:** In connection with a discussion about how many
people from the FBI and Department should be present during a potential
interview of former Secretary Clinton, Page stated in a February 24,
2016 text message to Strzok, "One more thing: she might be our next
president. The last thing you need us going in there loaded for bear.
You think she's going to remember or care that it was more doj than
fbi?" Strzok replied, "Agreed.." Page sent similar text messages to
McCabe and another FBI employee around the same time, adding that having
a larger number in the room "is not operationally necessary" and that
"this is as much about reputational protection as anything." These
text messages occurred at almost the midpoint of the Midyear
investigation, before Clinton's interview was formally scheduled.
Ultimately, Clinton was interviewed on July 2, 2016, and there were
three FBI and five Department officials in the room. Page did not attend
the interview.

Both Page and Strzok told the OIG that these messages did not reflect
that the FBI took into account the likelihood that former Secretary
Clinton would be president when conducting her interview. Page told us
that her text message was advocating that the FBI should "follow the
practice we always, always follow" with respect to who would attend
Clinton's interview, "and not do something that might otherwise
negatively impact Clinton's thinking or her feeling about the FBI in
general." She stated that having fewer people present in an interview is
generally better for building rapport and ensuring that the right people
are asking the questions, and that by "loaded for bear" she meant having
a large number of interviewers in the room, which might look "like we're
trying to intimidate" Clinton. Strzok told us he did not interpret
Page's text message to suggest that the FBI should treat Clinton
differently "because she might be the next president," and he stated
that he was certain he "made no decision based on anything Clinton
might be or become or have done."

**July 26, 2016:** Strzok and Page exchanged a series of text messages
on July 26, 2016, while they appeared to be watching television coverage
of the

Democratic National Convention. In the course of this exchange, Page
texted, "Yeah, it is pretty cool. Clinton just has to win now. I'm
not going to lie, I got a flash of nervousness yesterday about trump.
The sandernistas have the potential to make a very big mistake
here.." Strzok responded, "I'm not worried about them. I'm worried
about the anarchist Assanges who will take fed information and disclose
it to disrupt. We've gotta get the memo and brief and case filing done."

Strzok told us that "the memo" he was referring to was the closing

Letterhead Memorandum (LHM) summarizing the Clinton email server
investigation. Strzok said he was not certain what the "brief and case
filing" referred to, but speculated these could have related to a FOIA
filing. When asked if his text message meant that the LHM needed to be
completed because he was worried about Trump and wanted Clinton to win,
Strzok said, "No, not at all." He described this exchange as a
"discussion that is purely in that private, personal realm about beliefs
and opinions that are personal opinions intermixed with discussion of
work tasks because, as a work colleague, there are a lot of things
going on, and they do get intermixed." Strzok stated that mixing work
and personal communications in the same text message exchange, on the
same device, was "dumb" and acknowledged that it could create a
perception issue. He again emphasized that he never took any
investigative step designed to help or hurt Clinton or Trump.

Page told us that she was not sure what the "memo and brief and case
filing" referred to but that it might have been a related classified
issue. She stated that she did not read Strzok's text message to connect
the need to "get the memo and brief and case filing done" with his
political preferences. Rather, Page stated that she thought that the use
of "fed" in the text message may have been an erroneous auto-correction
of an unclassified acronym of a codename and that Strzok was referring
to concerns about leaks by actors like Assange (Wikileaks) "who will
leak classified information."

**3. Text Messages Discussing Political Sentiments and the Russia
Investigation**

In this section, we highlight examples of text messages that appear to
combine expressions of political sentiments with discussion of the
Russia investigation. We provide background and context where possible
to assist in understanding the text messages. We also include the
explanations provided by Page and Strzok about these text messages.

**July 31, 2016:** In connection with formal opening of the FBI's Russia
investigation, Strzok texted Page: "And damn this feels momentous.
Because this matters. The other one did, too, but that was to ensure we
didn't F something up.

This matters because this MATTERS. So super glad to be on this voyage
with you."

Strzok told us the "other one" referred to in the text message was the

Midyear investigation. He said his text message was comparing and
contrasting the Midyear investigation with the Russia investigation, and
reflected his view that "if there is criminal activity there in
Midyear, it is comparatively limited, versus allegations in the
Russia investigation which are of the most extraordinarily,
potentially grave conduct." He said that his assessment of the
significance of the Russia investigation was not affected by his
personal feelings toward Trump and that it would be the same if another
campaign were involved.

**August 6, 2016:** In an exchange on August 6, 2016, Page forwarded
Strzok a news article relating to Trump's criticism of the Khans (the
Gold Star family who appeared at the Democratic National Convention) and
stated, "Jesus. You should read this. And Trump should go f himself."
Strzok responded favorably to the article and added, "And F Trump." Page
replied, "So. This is not to take away from the unfairness of it all,
but we are both deeply fortunate people." She then sent another text
message, "And maybe you're meant to stay where you are because you're
meant to protect the country from that menace. To that end, read this:"
and forwarded a David Brooks column from the New York Times about Trump
"enablers" in the Republican Party who had not opposed Trump. Strzok
responded, "Thanks. It's absolutely true that we're both very fortunate.
And of course I'll try and approach it that way. I just know it will be
tough at times. I can protect our country at many levels, not sure if
that helps.."

When asked to explain what she meant by "you're meant to protect the
country from that menace," Page began by stating, "I was totally
appalled that the President would insult the father of a dead service
member.. And just find that unconscionable and disgusting and cruel."
She also stated that the "menace" was "the potential threat to national
security that Trump or his people pose if the predication for the
Russia investigation is true." Strzok told us that he did not
interpret Page's reference to "protect the country from that menace" to
refer to Trump. He stated, "I take menace a little differently. I take,
I take the menace as, again, I view any foreign interference with our
electoral process to be a threat, to be a violation of law.. So when
I see menace, I, you know, is that Trump, is that

Russian interference, is it the combination of the two?"

**August 8, 2016:** In a text message on August 8, 2016, Page stated,

"Trump's not ever going to become president, right? Right?!" Strzok
responded,

"No. No he's not. We'll stop it."^[^187^](#fn187){#fnref187
.footnote-ref}^

When asked about this text message, Strzok stated that he did not
specifically recall sending it, but that he believed that it was
intended to reassure Page that Trump would not be elected, not to
suggest that he would do something to impact the investigation. Strzok
told the OIG that he did not take any steps to try to affect the outcome
of the presidential election, in either the Midyear investigation or the
Russia investigation. Strzok stated that had he---or the FBI in
general---actually wanted to prevent Trump from being elected, they
would not have maintained the confidentiality of the investigation into
alleged collusion between Russia and members of the Trump campaign in
the months before the election. Page similarly stated that, although she
could not speak to what Strzok meant by that text message, the FBI's
decision to keep the Russia investigation confidential before the
election shows that they did not take steps to impact the outcome of the
election.

**August 15, 2016:** In a text message exchange on August 15, 2016,
Strzok told Page, "I want to believe the path you threw out for
consideration in Andy's office---that there's no way he gets
elected---but I'm afraid we can't take that risk. It's like an insurance
policy in the unlikely event you die before you're 40.." The

"Andy" referred to in the text message appears to be FBI Deputy Director
Andrew McCabe. McCabe was not a party to this text message, and we did
not find evidence that he received it.

In an interview with the OIG, McCabe was shown the text message and he
told us that he did not know what Strzok was referring to in the message
and recalled no such conversation. Page likewise told us she did not
know what that text message meant, but that the team had discussions
about whether the FBI would have the authority to continue the Russia
investigation if Trump was elected. Page testified that she did not find
a reference in her notes to a meeting in McCabe's office at that time.

Strzok provided a lengthy explanation for this text message. In
substance, Strzok told us that he did not remember the specific
conversation, but that it likely was part of a discussion about how to
handle a variety of allegations of "collusion between members of the
Trump campaign and the government of Russia." As part of this
discussion, the team debated how aggressive to be and whether to use
overt investigative methods. Given that Clinton was the "prohibitive
favorite" to win, Strzok said that they discussed whether it made sense
to compromise sensitive sources and methods to "bring things to some
sort of precipitative conclusion and understanding." Strzok said the
reference in his text message to an "insurance policy" reflected his
conclusion that the FBI should investigate the allegations thoroughly
right away, as if Trump were going to win. Strzok stated that Clinton's
position in the polls did not ultimately impact the investigative
decisions that were made in the Russia matter.

**May 18, 2017:** Mueller was appointed Special Counsel on May 17, 2017.

The next day Strzok and Page exchanged text messages in a discussion of
whether Strzok should join the Special Counsel's investigation. Strzok
wrote: "For me, and this case, I personally have a sense of unfinished
business. I unleashed it with MYE. Now I need to fix it and finish it."
Later in the same exchange, Strzok, apparently while weighing his career
options, made this comparison: "Who gives a f\*ck, one more
Assistant Director.versus an investigation leading to
impeachment?"^[^188^](#fn188){#fnref188 .footnote-ref}^ Later in this
exchange, Strzok stated, "you and I both know the odds are nothing. If I
thought it was likely I'd be there no question. I hesitate in part
because of my gut sense and concern there's no big there there."

Strzok acknowledged that his text messages could be read to suggest that
Strzok held himself responsible for Trump's victory and Clinton's defeat
because of the Midyear investigation and that he viewed the Russia
investigation as providing him an opportunity to "fix" this result by
working on an investigation that could result in the impeachment of
President Trump. However, Strzok said he strongly disagreed with this
interpretation and provided a lengthy explanation for these statements.
Strzok said that he wanted to "finish" the Russia investigation rather
than be reassigned midway through and lose the institutional knowledge
of issues being investigated by the Special Counsel. He further stated
that he was referring to Russia's use of the Midyear investigation in
its election interference efforts. Strzok explained, "It wasn't so
much the investigation about Midyear, but then how it played into, how
it was being portrayed in the political environment, how it was being
leveraged by the government of Russia and all the social media
disseminations.. We then came to see all this kind of overlap and
replaying of events with regard to the involvement of Russia, and
certainly the back-and-forth with some elements of the Trump campaign."
When asked what he wanted "to fix," Strzok identified the misperception
that "Russia wasn't involved," given that "Russia did interfere with our
elections."

When asked to explain his comment about working on an investigation
"leading to impeachment?" Strzok denied that he had already prejudged
the Russia investigation. He described himself as a person:

Who has had access to the information about the, all of these cases
and all of the ins and outs of what the allegations in the Russia
investigation are. And that he has both, as it matters as a public
servant, he has a professional concern about the allegations.. And he
is concerned on the impact of the national security of the United
States. He finds that he has an expertise and a competence in this line
of work, and he feels compelled and driven to pursue that and pursue
those facts where they lay.

He stated further that his professional actions, including on the staff
of the Special Counsel, were not affected by political bias.

We also asked Strzok about his "no big there there" message." Strzok
stated:

As I looked at the predicating information, as I looked at the facts as
we understood them from.the allegations that Russia had these emails,
and offered to members of the Trump campaign to release them. As we
looked at the various actors, the question was,.was that part of
a broad, coordinated effort, or was that simply a bunch of opportunists
seeking to advance their own or individual agendas.which of that is
it?

.My question was about whether or not this represented a large,
coordinated conspiracy or not. And from that, as I looked at what would
give me professional fulfillment, what I thought would be the best use
of my skills and talents for the FBI and for the United States, whether
to take, which path to take.

Page stated that she understood Strzok's reference to "unfinished
business" that he had "unleashed" and needed "to fix and finish" to be
"a reflection of our Director having been fired," and "the purported
reason for why the Director was fired was his mishandling of the Midyear
investigation, and the work force was, you know, in mutiny, and it was
all about Midyear." She disagreed with the suggestion that Strzok felt
responsible for Clinton's defeat in the election. She said she
interpreted Strzok's reference to impeachment to mean he wanted to be
involved in the Russia investigation because it was so important "it
*might* lead to impeachment," not because "it *will* lead to
impeachment."^[^189^](#fn189){#fnref189 .footnote-ref}^ (Emphasis
added). In response to the OIG's question as to whether Strzok's text
messages made it appear that he was biased against Trump from the
beginning of the Special Counsel investigation, Page acknowledged that
the text messages could be read that way, but stated, "That's just
not how I read it." She stated, "He wants to finish the Russia
investigation to do, right, this President fired the Director. This
President's team is being investigated for potentially colluding with
the Russians in the 2016 election. So, he wants to finish
his involvement."

**4. Other Notable Text Messages**

In this section, we briefly discuss other text message exchanges between
Page and Strzok that have received significant public attention.

**April 1, 2016:** On April 1, 2016, Page sent the following text
message to Strzok: "So look, you say we text on that phone when we talk
about hillary because it can't be traced, you were just venting bc you
feel bad that you're gone so much but it can't be helped right now."
Page told us that this was an example of why she and Strzok used their
work phones to conceal their affair from their spouses. Page stated,
"That text message follows us communicating personally on our
personal phones, and his wife inquiring what it is he was doing. And so
my saying, tell her we're talking about Hillary is not in fact because
we were talking about Hillary, but coming up with an explanation for him
to provide his wife with respect to why we were on that phone."

**June 30, 2016:** On June 30, 2016, Strzok sent the following text
message to Page: ".Just left Bill.. He changed President to
'another senior government official.'" Based on context, Strzok told us
"Bill" referred to Priestap. Strzok stated:

My recollection is that the early Comey speech drafts included
references to emails that Secretary Clinton had with President Obama and
I think there was some conversation about, well do we want to be that
specific? Is there some, out of deference to executive communications,
do we want to do that? And I remember that discussion occurring. I
remember the decision was made to take it out. I know I was not the
person who did it.

Strzok told us that he saw no indication that this decision was done "to
curry favor or to influence anything." Page told us that she could not
remember the discussion referenced in this text message. We also discuss
this change to Comey's July 5 statement in Chapter Six.

**July 24, 2016:** On July 24, 2016, before the Russia investigation was
formally opened, Page and Strzok exchanged numerous text messages in
which they discuss U.S. District Court Judge Rudolph "Rudy" Contreras.
Judge Contreras is also a current member of the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Court (FISC). They discuss, among other things, Strzok
hosting a social gathering and inviting

Contreras. They also discuss whether Contreras would "have to recuse
himself" on "espionage FISA" cases given "his friend oversees them." We
asked Strzok about this exchange and his relationship with Contreras.
Strzok stated that he considered Contreras a friend and explained that
they met years ago when their children attended the same elementary
school. Strzok stated that this text message exchange reflected that "it
had been a while since he had seen" Contreras and he was telling Page
that it would nice to see Contreras and find out how he was doing.
Strzok continued:

What it was not, and I will say this in response to, again, a lot of the
speculation I've seen. At no time did I ever with Judge Contreras think
of or in actuality reach out for the purpose of discussing any case or
trying to get any decision, provide any information, or otherwise
influence him with regard to any investigative matter that I or others
were involved with.

Strzok told us that Judge Contreras "knew that Strzok worked or may
have worked national security matters for the FBI," but knew nothing
about the specifics of Strzok's job or any of the cases he worked.
Strzok stated that he never discussed specifics of any investigation
with Judge Contreras. Strzok also told us that the social gathering
discussed in this text message exchange never occurred.

We also asked Strzok about the recusal discussion reflected in the text
messages. Strzok stated:

This came up in the context of now that he was on the FISC and that
we did have a relationship, the question about, from an ethical
perspective and doing the right thing from an ethical perspective, where
the lines of either notifying the court and/or either his recusal or my
recusal with regard to matters that might bring us in contact with each
other on the professional side.

And so the discussion which then came up.was, whether in the context
of being the head of the Counterespionage Section, were there, noticing
the court or at a minimum noticing the Department's National Security
Division Office of Intelligence of that personal relationship to allow
the court to make the appropriate decision, or, you know, the, the
conglomeration of all of us to make the appropriate ethical decision of
whether or not to do was the substance of this discussion. But all of
this discussion is a consideration of doing the right, appropriate,
ethical thing. It is the polar opposite of what is being suggested by
some. This is, this is the flip side of that saying we want to make sure
we're absolutely doing the right thing. And by the way.Judge
Contreras is thoughtful and extraordinarily conscientious about ethics
and doing the right thing. So this is, if anything, and what is
particularly personally aggravating to me is this speaks highly to him
as a person, to us as the way we were thinking about it. And it's being
absolutely twisted in the, the complete opposite direction.

Strzok told us that this text message exchange was not about any
particular case and represented a more general concern of what he should
do.

**September 2, 2016:** On September 2, 2016, Page and Strzok exchanged
the following text messages. The sender of each message is identified
after the timestamp.

09:41:30, Strzok: "Checkout my 9:30 mtg on the 7th"

09:42:40, Page: "I can tell you why you're having that meeting."

09:42:46, Page: "It's not what you think."

09:49:39, Strzok: "TPs for D?"

09:50:29, Page: "Yes, bc potus wants to know everything we are doing."

09:55:21, Strzok: "I'm sure an honest answer will come out of that
meeting.."

This text message exchange occurred during the period in which Midyear
was effectively closed---after Comey's July 5 announcement and prior to
the discovery of Midyear-related emails on the Weiner laptop in late
September. Strzok told us that these text messages referenced a request
by the White House to get a

"comprehensive idea across the U.S. Intelligence Community" about the
scope of Russian interference activities and details of what Russia was
doing. Strzok stated that this was "strictly limited to Russian actors"
and he did not believe any investigations of U.S. persons were part of
this request. Page stated that this exchange had "nothing to do with the
Clinton email investigation."

**November 9, 2016:** The day after the presidential election, on
November 9, 2016, Page sent the following text message to Strzok: "Are
you even going to give out your calendars? Seems kind of depressing.
Maybe it should just be the first meeting of the secret society." We
asked Page about this message. Page stated that the "calendars"
referenced in this text message were "funny and snarky" calendars of
Russian President Vladimir Putin in different poses, such as "holding a
kitten." Page told us that Strzok had previously purchased these
calendars as "dark gallows humor." Page stated that the reference to the
"secret society" was also a "dark sort of" humor about Trump winning the
election and concerns she and Strzok had about Trump. Page continued:

And so, we somewhat with dark humor, but also somewhat, you know, with
real concern as, of course, our Director actually gets fired, talk
about, like, well, when he shuts down the, when he finds out about the
investigation and shuts down the FBI, you know, we'll form a secret
society so we can like continue the investigation. So that's just,
that's obviously not real. I mean, that's just us being, you know, sort
of snarky. But that's a, that's a joke. I mean, a reflection of that
sort of joke.

Strzok stated that he "took and certainly believed this text message
to be a joke." Strzok explained:

I had gotten a bunch of Putin 2017 calendars where he is in various,
glorious displays of Russian patriotism for each month. And we were
going to give it out to the, kind of the, the closer senior members of
the Russia investigation team, just to, you know, hey, we made it
to, to Election Day just as like, you know, thanks for your hard work
because people, you know, had been truly working very hard..

To give that out and, you know, and Lisa, you know, saying, God, you
know, and the thought was, you know, give it out like right around the
election. And then my, my take of Lisa's, and I think the everyman,
commonsense take of this is that it's like, God, you know, is that
something you would want to, you know, want to do right now? And, you
know, the secret society is entirely in jest.

**B. Instant Messages between Agent 1 and Agent 5**

Agent 1 is an experienced counterintelligence agent and was assigned to
the Midyear investigative team from August 2015 through the conclusion
of the investigation. Agent 1 was one of four agents responsible for the
day-to-day activities of the Midyear investigation. Agent 1's duties
included conducting witness interviews and Agent 1 was one of the two
agents who interviewed former Secretary Clinton on July 2. Agent 5 is
also an experienced counterintelligence agent and was a member of the
Midyear filter team. As a member of the filter team, Agent 5 was
responsible for identifying privileged communications among the
materials obtained by the FBI to ensure that they were not reviewed by
the investigative team. Neither Agent 1 nor Agent 5 was assigned to the
FBI's Russia investigation or the Special Counsel investigation.

As noted previously, we identified instant messages sent by Agent 1,
often to Agent 5, that expressed opinions critical of the conduct and
quality of the Midyear investigation. We discussed these message in
Chapter Five. In addition to those messages, we identified two instant
message exchanges that appeared to combine a discussion of politics with
a discussion of the Midyear investigation. We also identified instant
messages between Agent 1 and Agent 5 that expressed support for Clinton
and hostility toward Trump. We discuss these messages in this section,
along with explanations provided by Agent 1 and Agent 5. Because it is
relevant to their explanations, we note that Agent 1 and Agent 5, who
are now married, were in a personal relationship that predated their
assignment to the Midyear investigation.

**1. Instant Messages Referencing the Midyear Investigation**

On July 6, 2016, the day after Comey's Midyear declination announcement,
Agent 1 and an FBI employee not involved with Midyear exchanged messages
about the investigation. During the course of this discussion, Agent 1
described the prior weekend's activities, which included the interview
of Clinton. A portion of this instant message exchange follows. The
sender of each message is noted after the
timestamp.^[^190^](#fn190){#fnref190 .footnote-ref}^

15:07:41, Agent 1: ".I'm done interviewing the President -- then type
the 302. 18 hour day.."

15:13:32, FBI Employee: "you interviewed the president?"

15:17:09, Agent 1: "you know -- HRC" Hillary Rodham Clinton

15:17:18, Agent 1: "future pres"

15:17:22, Agent 1: "Trump cant win"

15:17:31, Agent 1: "demographics dont line up"

15:17:37, Agent 1: "America has changed"

We asked Agent 1 if he thought of Clinton as the next president while
conducting the Midyear investigation. Agent 1 stated, "I think my
impression going into the election in that personal realm is that all of
the polls were favoring Hillary Clinton." We asked Agent 1 if he treated
Clinton differently because of this assumption. Agent 1 stated,
"Absolutely not. I think the message they said that our leadership told
us and our actions were to find whatever was there and whatever,
whatever that means is what it means."

Comey sent the first letter to Congress about the Weiner laptop
discovery on October 28, 2016. Agent 1 and Agent 5 exchanged instant
messages about the letter and Trump's reaction to it later that day. The
sender of each messages is noted after the timestamp.

13:46:48, Agent 5: "jesus christ... Trump: Glad FBI is fixing 'horrible
mistake' on clinton emails... for fuck's sake."

13:47:27, Agent 5: "the fuck's sake part was me, the rest was Trump."

13:49:07, Agent 1: "Not sure if Trump or the fifth floor is worse..."

13:49:22, Agent 5: "I'm so sick of both..."

13:50:25, Agent 5: "+o( TRUMP"^[^191^](#fn191){#fnref191 .footnote-ref}^

13:50:30, Agent 5: "+o( Fifth floor"

13:50:34, Agent 5: "+o( FBI"

13:50:44, Agent 5: "+o( Average American public"

We asked both Agent 1 and Agent 5 about these messages. Agent 1 and
Agent 5 both stated the reference to "fifth floor" referred to the
location of the FBI WFO's Counterintelligence Division. Agent 1
continued: "Again, you know, I think a general, general theme in a lot
of this is some personal comment, or, you know, complaining about common
topics and leadership and, and venting." Agent 5 also described this as
general complaining to Agent 1 and also as an example of her being "very
tired of working" these types of cases. Agent 5 also noted that she was
not involved in the review of the Weiner laptop.

**2. Instant Messages Commenting on Trump or Clinton**

On August 29, 2016, Agent 1 and Agent 5 exchanged the following instant
messages as part of a discussion about their jobs. The sender of each
message is noted after the timestamp.

10:39:49, Agent 1: "I find anyone who enjoys this job an absolute
fucking idiot. If you dont think so, ask them one more question. Who are
you voting for? I guarantee you it will be Donald Drumpf."

10:40:13, Agent 5: "i forgot about drumpf..."

10:40:27, Agent 5: "that's so sad and pathetic if they want to vote for
him."

10:40:43, Agent 5: "someone who can't answer a question"

10:40:51, Agent 5: "someone who can't be professional for even a second"

On September 9, 2016, Agent 1 and Agent 5 exchanged the following
instant messages.

08:56:43, Agent 5: "i'm trying to think of a 'would i rather' instead of
spending time with those people"

08:56:54, Agent 1: "stick your tongue in a fan??"

08:56:58, Agent 5: "i would rather have brunch with trump"

08:57:03, Agent 1: "ha"

08:57:15, Agent 1: "french toast with drumpf"

08:57:19, Agent 5: "i would rather have brunch with trump and a bunch of
his supporters like the ones from ohio that are retarded" 08:57:23,
Agent 5: ":)"

Agent 5 told the OIG these instant messages "referenced TV programming
and commentary that Agent 1 and Agent 5 had recently viewed together."
Agent 5 continued, "The reference was not a general statement about a
particular part of the country, rather it was in jest and pertained to
individuals' inability to articulate any reason why they so strongly
favored one candidate over another."

On Election Day on November 8, 2016, Agent 1 and Agent 5 exchanged the
following instant messages.

14:21:10, Agent 1: "You think HRC is gonna win right? You think we
should get nails and some boards in case she doesnt"

14:21:56, Agent 5: "she better win... otherwise i'm gonna be walking
around with both of my guns."

14:22:05, Agent 5: "and likely quitting on the spot"

14:28:43, Agent 1: "You should know;....."

14:28:45, Agent 1: "that"

14:28:50, Agent 1: "I'm....."

14:28:56, Agent 1: "with her."

14:28:58, Agent 1: "ooooooooooooooooooo"

14:29:02, Agent 1: "show me the money"

14:29:03, Agent 5: "\<:o)"

14:29:14, Agent 5: "screw you trump"

14:19:18, Agent 5: "wheeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee!"

14:29:32, Agent 5: "go baby, go! let's give her Virginia"

14:30:03, Agent 1: "not to my country. You just cant get up and try to
appeal to all the worst things in humans and fool my country...."

14:30:12, Agent 1: "Just 49% of us....."

14:30:25, Agent 5: "let's hope it's 49% or less..."

14:30:31, Agent 5: "we'll find out..."

In a December 6, 2016 exchange, Agent 5 complained to Agent 1 about
being required to be on call on the day of the presidential
inauguration. In the middle of expressing displeasure about this, Agent
5 sent a message to Agent 1 that stated, "fuck trump." On February 9,
2017, in the context of an FBI employee receiving a presidential award
for public service, Agent 5 messaged, ".I think now that trump is the
president, i'd refuse it. it would be an insult to even be considered
for it."

We asked Agent 1 and Agent 5 about their use of instant messaging
generally and about these messages in particular. As mentioned in
Chapter Five, Agent 1 told us that he believed that instant messages
were not retained by the FBI and therefore used less caution with those
communications than he would have with other types of communications,
such as email or text messages.^[^192^](#fn192){#fnref192
.footnote-ref}^ Agent 5 also made this point, stating that she
considered these exchanges as a private "outlet" to Agent 1. Both Agent
1 and Agent 5 apologized for their use of instant messaging in this
manner and told us that they were embarrassed.

We asked Agent 1 whether he believed these political discussions raised
questions about the integrity or reliability of the Midyear
investigation. Agent 1 stated:

I don't based on knowing my actions. I guess I would kind of repeat what
I said before. Yes, I, I have personal, a personal life, private
opinions, private views. I think what happened here is that I used
instant message and chat like it was my home.

.I like the job of fact-finding and having it lead you where you go.
I don't start any day with an endgame in mind of let it, let it go to,
go to that. That's the way I think I act, that's how I think I've acted
over my whole career. That's how I, that's how I know I acted in, in
this case.

Yeah, I think that, I understand your question because it's an FBI
system. I just unfortunately did not view it that way and did not use it
that way. I used it as, as, you know, some of my worst hits here, as a,
a way to relieve stress, as a way to be jocular, as a way to exaggerate,
as a way to blow off steam, as a, you know, potentially get sympathy
from, and then, you know, it was compounded by frustrations from other
people coming to me for answers for why certain people got elected, and
is it our fault, and, so I think there was a, kind of a cocktail of, of
stress in this case that came out on this system like it was a
conversation.

So I, I don't, I don't think so based on knowing my actions and what I
did knowing the actions of the people around me.

We also asked Agent 1 whether his personal beliefs impacted his
investigative actions in Midyear. Agent 1 responded:

In no way do I think it, it impacted my view. I guess the best way
is almost like a, it's almost like you switch on your, when, when we did
our morning meetings, it was what do we have and where do we go next?
It, it was just like almost, you know, like there's a, there's the
professional side, the do your job side, and there's a personal side.
And I think a lot of this falls into the personal side.

squad, my awareness was that it was not logged by the FBI because I
tried to get those records for internal investigations." Agent 5 stated
the she also had requested instant messages in prior internal
investigations and been told that they were not preserved. Agents 1 and
5 told the OIG that they learned in April 2017 that the FBI had retained
instant messages since February 2015, as the result of receiving a
memorandum about preservation and criminal discovery obligations
stemming from the FBI's instant messaging system. The FBI email
distributing this memorandum advised employees that the FBI began
preserving instant messages in February 2015 and stated, "Lync should
not be used for substantive communications."

.It was only to try to do the right thing.. That's, that's the
only thing, the only thought process in my head when I was, when I was
doing my job.

We asked Agent 5 how she would respond to someone who read these
messages and concluded the opinions expressed in them impacted the
Midyear investigation. Agent 5 stated:

Well, I can see someone who doesn't know us at all saying the same,
wondering, I guess, if our political beliefs could have impacted
the Midyear investigation. I can tell you in no way did my political
or what I understand of Agent 1, no political anything is going to
interfere with us doing our job as professionals.

I can see me going into these rants. I can see me ranting in some of
these, and, you know, again, I think all of these are very personal,
offthe-cuff.these are personal, private messages. I mean, you could
probably even see the difference between, if you've seen anything in my
career that I put to the file.for, you know, case-related things.
I am very thorough, methodical, and I think through everything when I'm
typing it. I don't even cut corners with acronyms. I, I treat that
extremely seriously in my career, and even before I became an agent.

So I, I would tell that person that part of being a professional, part
of the oath that I swore here to work, I.uphold it. And I upheld it
at this point. I, I do have personal beliefs and personal opinions. You
know, I expressed some of those. Some of them come out in frustration.
Some of them come out in jokes. I can see us quoting things kind of just
to make us smile, you know, make us feel better, you know, after
sometimes tough days. And.I would say in, in no way has it ever or
would it ever affect the way I, I handle any investigation, any case,
any professional work that I, that I put forward.

**C. FBI Attorney 2 Instant Messages**

FBI Attorney 2 was assigned to the Midyear investigation early in 2016.
FBI Attorney 2 was not the lead FBI attorney assigned to Midyear and he
told us he provided support to the investigation as needed. FBI Attorney
2 told us that he was also assigned to the investigation into Russian
election interference and was the primary FBI attorney assigned to that
investigation beginning in early 2017. FBI Attorney 2 told us that he
was then assigned to the Special Counsel investigation once it began.
FBI Attorney 2 left the Special Counsel's investigation and returned to
the FBI in late February 2018, shortly after the OIG provided the
Special Counsel with some of the instant messages discussed in this
section.

We identified instant messages on FBINet involving FBI Attorney 2 that
discussed political issues. Most of these exchanges appeared to be jokes
or attempts at humor, often involving Trump. We asked FBI Attorney 2 in
general about the use of FBI instant messaging in this manner. FBI
Attorney 2 told us that, in general, he regretted his use of instant
messaging in this manner and noted "it's not something that I did
routinely." He described these messages as "commentary" on recent
political events and not connected to decisions or activities in
investigations. FBI Attorney 2 stated that almost all of these messages
were sent to co-workers he "considered to be" friends and he "was
talking to them in that capacity," and "not in a professional
capacity." FBI Attorney 2 reiterated that these messages or views had
"absolutely" no impact on his work on investigations. He stated:

I, like most people, have particular views on, on politics. I'm a bit of
a news junkie when it comes to government. It's one of the main reasons
I, I joined the federal workforce is because I've always found it so
fascinating and interesting.

But when it came to doing my work, I never injected this, this type of,
of color commentary or this type of water cooler type talk into that. I,
I maintained impartiality and just tried to work through the issues
individually as they came through. So if they needed some assistance on
a warrant or some assistance on, you know, potentially pursuing contacts
with another government agency or something like that, like, I just, I
assisted with the process more like, kind of like an XO type role I
guess.

Among the general discussion of political issues by FBI Attorney 2, we
identified three instant message exchanges that raised concerns of
potential bias. The first of these exchanges was on October 28, 2016,
shortly after Comey's

October 28 letter to Congress that effectively announced the reopening
of the Midyear investigation. FBI Attorney 2 sent similar messages to
four different FBI employees. The timestamps of these messages are
included below. The messages stated:

13:44:42, to FBI Employee 1: "I mean, I never really liked the Republic
anyway."

13:44:52, to FBI Employee 2: "I mean, I never really liked the Republic
anyway."

14:01:52, to FBI Employee 3: "As I have initiated the destruction of the
republic.. Would you be so kind as to have a coffee with me this
afternoon?"

15:28:50, to FBI Employee 4: "I'm clinging to small pockets of happiness
in the dark time of the Republic's destruction"

FBI Attorney 2 described these messages as reflecting his surprise and
frustration that the FBI "was essentially walking into a landmine in
terms of injecting itself into the election at that late in the
process." FBI Attorney 2 continued:

I think that, that there is some distinguishment between my frustration
at the way that the Bureau is operating itself in October in terms of,
of wading into the process at that point.. But, I think that there is
a distinguishment between having reservations about the way that we were
operating and just expressing the frustration about, about us coming
into the process. It's like, in terms of, of, you know, what's not in
here too is like, you know, we, at that point we had investigation, the
Russia investigation was ongoing as well. And that information was
obviously kept close hold and was not released until March. So, you
know, it, it was just kind of frustration that we weren't handling both
of them the same way with, with that level I guess.

FBI Attorney 2 described the "destruction" language as "hyperbolic" and
"off-thecuff commentary to friends."

The second exchange we identified occurred on November 9, 2016, the day
after the presidential election. FBI Attorney 2 and another FBI employee
who was not involved in the Midyear investigation exchanged the
following instant messages. Note that the sender of the instant message
is identified after the timestamp and intervening messages that did not
contribute to the understanding of this exchange are not included.

09:38:14, FBI Attorney 2: "I am numb."

09:55:35, FBI Employee: "I can't stop crying."

10:00:13, FBI Attorney 2: "That makes me even more sad."

10:43:20, FBI Employee: "Like, what happened?"

10:43:37, FBI Employee: "You promised me this wouldn't happen. YOU
PROMISED."

10:43:43, FBI Employee: Okay, that might have been a lie..."

10:43:46, FBI Employee: "I'm very upset."

10:43:47, FBI Employee: "haha"

10:51:48, FBI Attorney 2: "I am so stressed about what I could have done
differently."

10:54:29, FBI Employee: "Don't stress. None of that mattered."

10:54:31, FBI Employee: "The FBI's influence."

10:59:36, FBI Attorney 2: "I don't know. We broke the momentum."

11:00:03, FBI Employee: "That is not so."

11:02:22, FBI Employee: "All the people who were initially voting for
her would not, and were not, swayed by any decision the FBI put out.
Trump's supporters are all poor to middle class, uneducated, lazy POS
that think he will magically grant them jobs for doing nothing. They
probably didn't watch the debates, aren't fully educated on his
policies, and are stupidly wrapped up in his unmerited enthusiasm."

11:11:43, FBI Attorney 2: "I'm just devastated. I can't wait until I can
leave today and just shut off the world for the next four days."

11:12:06, FBI Employee: "Why are you devastated?"

11:12:18, FBI Employee: "Yes, I'm not watching tv for four years."

11:14:16, FBI Attorney 2: "I just can't imagine the systematic
disassembly of the progress we made over the last 8 years. ACA is gone.
Who knows if the rhetoric about deporting people, walls, and crap is
true. I honestly feel like there is going to be a lot more gun issues,
too, the crazies won finally. This is the tea party on steroids. And the
GOP is going to be lost, they have to deal with an incumbent in 4 years.
We have to fight this again. Also Pence is stupid."

11:14:58, FBI Employee: "Yes that's all true."

11:15:01, FBI Attorney 2: "And it's just hard not to feel like the FBI
caused some of this. It was razor thin in some states."

11:15:09, FBI Employee: "Yes it was very thin."

11:15:23, FBI Attorney 2: "Plus, my god damned name is all over the
legal documents investigating his staff."

11:15:24, FBI Employee: "But no I absolutely do not believe the FBI had
any part."

11:15:33, FBI Attorney 2: "So, who knows if that breaks to him what he
is going to do."

We asked FBI Attorney 2 about this exchange. FBI Attorney 2 stated, "I'd
say that we're just discussing our personal feelings on the outcome of
the election between friends, yeah." When asked about the FBI employee
meant by "you promised me this wouldn't happen," FBI Attorney 2 told
us that he "did not promise the employee anything," and stated, "I
think, again, it's just kind of the way that the employee and I
converse. We tend to exaggerate some statements back and forth to one
another." We also asked FBI Attorney 2 what he meant by "I am so
stressed about what I could have done differently." FBI Attorney 2
replied:

That was a, that was a reference to, again, just in terms of the way
that we opened or how long it took us to open in October. You know,
with the, with the knowledge that the information was there on the
Weiner laptop, why we didn't work on it to, to gain access sooner, as
opposed to later because it was a, a bit of a, of a gap between us
learning of the information in New York and, and officially getting the
case reopened again..

Just in terms of like what I could have done to, to either have
accelerated the process or to, like how I expressed to FBI Attorney
1 that I didn't know if this was the correct way for the Bureau to be
doing this notification, et cetera. Whether, you know, I could have said
something differently to her that would have resonated in, or, or would
have been part of the discussion. But I wasn't anywhere near the, the
room deciding on these factors..

It was just kind of like a discussion on how I could have either moved
the process along more quickly or more efficiently at a, at a more, at
an earlier time, or whatnot.

When asked if he thought earlier action on the Weiner laptop would have
alleviated the need to send the letter to Congress, FBI Attorney 2
stated:

Well, not, not, I don't think that that would have alleviated the need
for the letter in the Director's eyes. But if we would have opened a few
weeks earlier, as opposed to at that time, two weeks before the
election, I think it, you know, it would have given more time for the
FBI's actions and, and required and, and necessary investigation to, to
occur to allow the, the public a chance to make their own
decisionmaking.

FBI Attorney 2 again reiterated that his "personal political feelings or
beliefs.in no way impacted" his work on the Midyear or Russia
investigations.

The third exchange we identified was on November 22, 2016. FBI Attorney
2 sent an instant message to FBI Attorney 1 commenting on the amount of
money the subject of an FBI investigation had been paid while working on
the Trump campaign. FBI Attorney 1 responded, "Is it making you rethink
your commitment to the Trump administration?" FBI Attorney 2 replied,
"Hell no." and then added, "Viva le resistance." FBI Attorney 1
responded that Trump was "going to eliminate all of our pensions in
order to pay for people like" the person discussed in the instant
message exchange, and FBI Attorney 1 and FBI Attorney 2 then began a
discussion of federal pension and retirement issues.

We asked both FBI Attorney 2 and FBI Attorney 1 about this exchange. FBI
Attorney 2 stated:

So, this is in reference to an ongoing subject. And then following that,
like I interpreted FBI Attorney 1's comment to me as being, you
know, just her and I socially and as friends discussing our particular
political views, to which I see that as more of a joking inquiry from
her. It's not something along the lines of where I'm not committed to
the U.S. Government. I obviously am and, you know, work to do my job
very well and to continue to, to work in that capacity. It's just the,
the lines bled through here just in terms of, of my personal, political
view in terms of, of what particular preference I have. But, but that
doesn't have any, any leaning on the way that I, I maintain myself as a
professional in the FBI.

We asked FBI Attorney 2 if "Viva le resistance" signaled he was going to
fight back against President Trump. FBI Attorney 2 responded:

That's not what I was doing.. I just, again, like that, that's just
like the entire, it's just my political view in terms of, of my
preference. It wasn't something along the lines of, you know, we're
taking certain actions in order to, you know, combat that or, or do
anything like that. Like that, that was not the intent of that. That was
more or less just like, you know, commentary between me and FBI
Attorney 1 in a personal friendship capacity where she is just making
a joke, and I'm responding. Like, it's not something that, that I
personally believe in that instance.

FBI Attorney 2 acknowledged that both he and FBI Attorney 1 were
assigned to the Russia investigation at this point in time and he "can
understand the, the perception issues that come from" this exchange.

FBI Attorney 1 stated that she and FBI Attorney 2 were friends and often
had discussions unrelated to work. She acknowledged that that this was
"not the right place to make those kind of comments." We asked FBI
Attorney 1 what she meant by the message, "Is it making you rethink your
commitment to the Trump administration?" She stated, "I think what I
meant was are you going to leave the government and start working to get
more money." We also asked FBI Attorney 1 what she understood FBI
Attorney 2 to mean when he messaged, "Viva le resistance." FBI Attorney
1 told us, "I think it was a joke obviously. But I think it was intended
to say that, you know, he was committed to continuing to work for the
Bureau, for these cases." FBI Attorney 1 stated that nothing about this
exchange affected her work on the Russia investigation.

**D. Analysis**

The conduct of the five FBI employees described in sections A, B, and C
of this Chapter has brought discredit to themselves, sowed doubt about
the FBI's handling of the Midyear investigation, and impacted the
reputation of the FBI. As described in Chapter Five, our review did not
find documentary or testimonial evidence directly connecting the
political views these employees expressed in their text messages and
instant messages to the specific investigative decisions we reviewed in
Chapter Five. Nonetheless, the conduct by these employees cast a cloud
over the FBI Midyear investigation and sowed doubt the FBI's work on,
and its handling of, the Midyear investigation. Moreover, the damage
caused by their actions extends far beyond the scope of the Midyear
investigation and goes to the heart of the FBI's reputation for neutral
factfinding and political independence.

We were deeply troubled by text messages sent by Strzok and Page that
potentially indicated or created the appearance that investigative
decisions were impacted by bias or improper considerations. Most of the
text messages raising such questions pertained to the Russia
investigation, which was not a part of this review. Nonetheless, when
one senior FBI official, Strzok, who was helping to lead the Russia
investigation at the time, conveys in a text message to another senior
FBI official, Page, that "we'll stop" candidate Trump from being
elected---after other extensive text messages between the two
disparaging candidate Trump---it is not only indicative of a biased
state of mind but, even more seriously, implies a willingness to take
official action to impact the presidential candidate's electoral
prospects. This is antithetical to the core values of the FBI and the
Department of Justice. Moreover, as we describe in Chapter Nine, in
assessing Strzok's decision to prioritize the Russia investigation over
following up on the Midyear-related investigative lead discovered on the
Weiner laptop in October 2016, these text messages led us to conclude
that we did not have confidence that Strzok's decision was free from
bias.

Each of the five employees expressed remorse about using FBI devices and
systems for these discussions, and each also stated that they intended
these messages to be private conversations. Several of the employees
also expressed the belief that their messages would not be preserved or
would be exempt from public disclosure under FOIA. We found this
reliance on the "private" nature of these messages to be misplaced.
Because these messages were exchanged on government systems and devices,
they were never "private." Every Department employee sees a notice each
time he or she logs onto the Department's network informing him or her
that there is no reasonable expectation of privacy in communications
exchanged on government systems.^[^193^](#fn193){#fnref193
.footnote-ref}^ We recommend that the FBI add a similar warning banner
to all of the FBI's mobile phones and devices.

Indeed, rather than being "private" communications, these messages were
at all times potentially subject to being reviewed by others (including
the OIG) and to being disclosed to the public. This point seems even
more obvious in light of the significant congressional and public
interest generated by the Midyear and Russia investigations. The
employees exchanging text messages and instant messages are trained law
enforcement agents or attorneys, and should have known that these
messages were potentially subject to release in response to FOIA
requests, subject to disclosure in civil litigation, or discoverable as
impeachment evidence even in the absence of the OIG
investigation.^[^194^](#fn194){#fnref194 .footnote-ref}^ We note that
these messages also potentially implicate the FBI's or prosecutors'
disclosure obligations in any prosecutions resulting from the
investigations at issue.^211^

We do not question that the FBI employees who sent these messages are
entitled to their own political views. Indeed, federal statutes and
regulations explicitly protect the right of federal employees to
"express.opinions on political subjects and candidates" and to
"exercise fully, freely, and without fear of penalty or reprisal, and to
the extent not expressly prohibited by law, their right to participate
or to refrain from participating in the political processes of the
Nation"--- provided such expression "does not compromise his or her
efficiency or integrity as an employee or the neutrality, efficiency, or
integrity of the agency or instrumentality of the United States
Government in which he or she is employed."^212^ While these employees
did not give up their First Amendment rights when they became employed
by the FBI, Supreme Court decisions make clear that the FBI retains the
authority---particularly as a law enforcement agency---to impose

head. Although what we turn over in criminal cases can be more targeted,
such as witness statements and exculpatory and impeachment evidence.
Just as in civil cases, emails and text messages that fit into one of
these categories must be turned over regardless whether they are
embarrassing or worded inappropriately..

Even though it's a casual medium, we can't take a casual attitude
towards email. All email, *even a text or a PIN message*, can be
instantly copied, archived, filed, and disseminated. Just like a memo or
a 302, emails reflect on the professionalism of the employee, and
potentially the FBI as a whole. Inappropriate, offensive language,
illadvised humor, off-color references, and poorly thought out remarks
have no place in any FBI communication. And it doesn't matter if that
communication was intended as a record or a non-record.

211. *See* USAM § 9-5.001, Policy Regarding Disclosure of Exculpatory
    and Impeachment Information; *see also United States* v. *Johnson,*
    14-CR-00412-TEH, 2015 WL 2125132, at 3-4 (N.D. Cal. May 6, 2015)
    (ordering the disclosure of racist text message(s) sent or received
    by a police officer involved in maintaining a crime scene);
    *Linetsky* v. *City of Solon*, Case No. 1:16-CV-52, 2016 WL 5402615
    (N.D. Ohio Sept. 28, 2016) (ordering an assistant prosecutor to
    produce in discovery all text messages between the prosecutor and
    law enforcement personnel pertaining to the plaintiff's prior
    criminal case); *United States* v. *Marcus Mumford*, Case No.
    3:17-CR-0008-JCC, 2017 WL 652448, at 2-3 (D. Ore. Feb. 16, 2017)
    (finding, during prosecution of Ammon Bundy's attorney in connection
    with a scuffle with U.S. Deputy Marshals, that "the Marshals'
    government issued cell phones are subject to discovery and should
    any texts reveal hostility towards Defendant or in any way casts
    doubt on their credibility, they must be produced.").
212. 5 U.S.C. §§ 7321, 7323(c); 5 C.F.R. § 734.402. FBI policy similarly
    provides that FBI employees retain the right to participate in
    various specified political activities, as long as such activity is
    not performed in concert with a political party, partisan political
    group, or a candidate for partisan political office. The list of
    political activities includes the right of an FBI employee to
    "express his or her opinion as an individual privately and
    publicly on political subjects and candidates," and to "otherwise
    participate fully in public affairs, except as prohibited by other
    Federal law, in a manner which does not compromise his or her
    efficiency or integrity as an employee or the neutrality,
    efficiency, or integrity of the agency or instrumentality of the
    United States Government in which he or she is employed." FBI Office
    of Integrity and Compliance, FBI Ethics and Integrity Program Policy
    Directive and Policy Guide, § 7.4.2 (Feb. 2, 2015).

certain restrictions on its employees' speech in the interest of
providing effective and efficient government.^[^195^](#fn195){#fnref195
.footnote-ref}^

We believe the messages discussed in this chapter---particularly the
messages that intermix work-related discussions with political
commentary--- potentially implicate provisions in the FBI's Offense Code
and Penalty Guidelines, which provides general categories of misconduct
for which FBI employees may be disciplined. This includes the provisions
relating to Offense Codes 1.7

(Investigative Deficiency -- Misconduct Related to Judicial
Proceedings), 3.6 (Misuse of Government Computer(s)), 3.11 (Misuse of
Government Property, Other), 5.21 (Unprofessional Conduct -- Off Duty),
and 5.22 (Unprofessional Conduct -- On Duty).^[^196^](#fn196){#fnref196
.footnote-ref}^ However, we did not identify any prior FBI misconduct
investigations under these provisions that involved a similar fact
pattern or similar issues.^[^197^](#fn197){#fnref197 .footnote-ref}^

At a minimum, we found that the employees' use of FBI systems and
devices to send the identified messages demonstrated extremely poor
judgment and a gross lack of professionalism. This is not just because
of the nature of the messages, but also because many of the messages
commented on individuals (Clinton and Trump) who were inextricably
connected to the Midyear and Russia investigations. The FBI is charged
with the investigation of many important and sensitive matters,
including some that generate intense public interest and debate. It is
essential that the public have confidence that the work of the FBI is
done without bias or appearance of partiality, and that those engaged in
it follow the

facts and law wherever they may lead and without any agenda or desired
result other than to see that justice is done.

Although we found no documentary or testimonial evidence directly
connecting the political views these employees expressed in their text
messages and instant messages to the specific Midyear investigative
decisions we reviewed in Chapter Five, the messages cast a cloud over
the FBI investigations to which these employees were assigned.
Ultimately, the consequences of these actions impact not only the
senders of these messages but also others who worked on these
investigations and, indeed, the entire FBI.

We therefore refer this information to the FBI for its handling and
consideration of whether the messages sent by the five employees listed
above violates the FBI's Offense Code of Conduct.

Additionally, we recommend that the FBI (1) assess whether it has
provided adequate training to employees about the proper use of text
messages and instant messages, including any related discovery
obligations, and (2) consider whether to provide additional guidance
about the allowable uses of FBI devices for any nongovernmental purpose,
including guidance about the use of FBI devices for political
conversations.

**II. Use of Personal Email**

As mentioned above, we identified several instances in which Comey and
Strzok used personal email accounts for official government business.
When questioned, Page also told us she used personal email for
work-related matters at times. We briefly discuss these issues below.

On September 21, 2016, the Department issued a Policy Statement
detailing the records retention policy for email communications. The
Policy Statement contained the following guidance for the use of
personal email accounts:

In general, DOJ email users should not create or send record emails or
attachments using non-official email accounts. However, should exigent
circumstances require the use of a personal account to conduct DOJ
business, the DOJ email user must ensure that the communicated
information is fully captured in a DOJ recordkeeping system within 20
days. If sending the email from a non-official account, the email user
must copy his or her DOJ email address as a recipient. If receiving a
DOJ business-related email on a non-official account, the DOJ email user
must forward the business-related email to his or her DOJ email account.
Once the user has ensured the capture of the email information in the
DOJ account, the DOJ email should be removed from the non-official
account.

*See* DOJ Policy Statement, Electronic Mail and Electronic Messaging
Records Retention (approved on September 21, 2016).

**A. Comey**

We identified numerous instances in which Comey used a personal email
account (a Gmail account) to conduct FBI business. We cite five examples
of such use in this section and include information provided by Comey
and Rybicki about Comey's use of a personal email account.

On November 8, 2016, Comey forwarded to his personal email account from
his unclassified FBI account a proposed post-election message for all
FBI employees that was entitled "Midyear thoughts." This document
summarized Comey's reasoning for notifying Congress about the
reactivation of the Midyear investigation. In late December 2016, Comey
forwarded to his personal email account from his unclassified FBI
account multiple drafts of a proposed year-end message to FBI employees.
On December 30, 2016, Comey forwarded to his personal email account from
his unclassified FBI account proposed responses to two requests for
information from the Office of Special
Counsel.^[^198^](#fn198){#fnref198 .footnote-ref}^ The forwarded email
included two attachments: (1) a certification for Comey to sign; and (2)
a list of FBI employees with information responsive to this request,
including their titles, office, appointment status, contact information,
and duty hours. On January 6, 2017, Comey forwarded to his personal
email account from his unclassified FBI account an email from Rybicki to
Kortan highlighting language that needed to be corrected in a Wall
Street Journal article. In mid-March 2017, Comey sent from his personal
email account to his own and Rybicki's unclassified FBI accounts
multiple drafts of Comey's proposed opening statement for his March 20,
2017 testimony to the House Intelligence Committee.

We asked Comey about his use of personal email for FBI business and
showed him the November 8, 2016 email with Rybicki as an example. Comey
stated:

I did not have an unclassified FBI connection at home that worked.
And I didn't bother to fix it, whole 'nother story, but I would either
use my BlackBerry, must have been or Samsung.my phone, I had two
phones---a personal phone and a government phone. Or if I needed to
write something longer, I would type it on my personal laptop and then
send it to Rybicki, usually I copied my own address.. Yeah. And so I
would use, for unclassified work, I would use my personal laptop for
word processing and then send it into the FBI.

We asked Comey if he had any concerns about conducting FBI business on
his personal laptop or personal email. Comey stated that he did not and
explained:

Because it was incidental and I was always making sure that the work got
forwarded to the government account to either my own account or Rybicki,
so I wasn't worried from a record-keeping perspective and it was,
because there will always be a copy of it in the FBI system and I wasn't
doing classified work there, so I wasn't concerned about that.

Comey stated that he did not use his personal email or laptop for
classified or sensitive information, such as grand jury information.
Comey told us that he only used his personal email and laptop "when I
needed to word process an unclassified document that was going to be
disseminated broadly, such as a public speech or public email to the
whole organization." We asked Comey if the use of personal email in this
manner was in accordance with FBI regulations. Comey replied, "I don't
know. I think so, but I don't know. I remember talking to Jim
Rybicki about it at one time, and I had the sense that it was okay."

We also asked Rybicki about Comey's use of a personal email account. In
response to the OIG's questions and in consultation with Comey, Rybicki
sent the OIG an email on April 20, 2017, that stated:

In rare circumstances during his tenure, Director Comey sends
unclassified emails from his official FBI.gov email account address to
his Gmail account. This permits him to open attachments and use his
personal laptop to then work on a speech or other content intended for
wide dissemination. He then sends drafts or the completed text to his
official FBI.gov email account or to another FBI.gov email account from
his Gmail account. He opened this personal account at about the time
he became Director..

To ensure a high level of cybersecurity, Director Comey routinely
deletes all emails from his Gmail account each day, and then clears
the deleted messages folder. He began this practice about two years ago.

The Director does not recall receiving and/or seeking advice concerning
the use of these accounts.

We found that, given the absence of exigent circumstances and the
frequency with which the use of personal email occurred, Comey's use of
a personal email account on multiple occasions for unclassified FBI
business to be inconsistent with the DOJ Policy Statement.

**B. Strzok and Page**

During our review, we identified several instances where Strzok used his
personal email account for government business. Examples included an
email chain forwarded to Strzok's personal email account on December 10,
2016, discussing a draft congressional response, and draft versions of
emails on his personal email account that Strzok eventually sent to
other FBI employees using his government account. Most troubling, on
October 29, 2016, Strzok forwarded from his FBI account to his personal
email account an email about the proposed search warrant the Midyear
team was seeking on the Weiner laptop. This email included a draft of
the search warrant affidavit, which contained information from the
Weiner investigation that appears to have been under seal at the time in
the Southern District of New York and information obtained pursuant to a
grand jury subpoena issued in the Eastern District of Virginia in the
Midyear investigation.^[^199^](#fn199){#fnref199 .footnote-ref}^

We asked Strzok about these emails and his use of personal email account
for FBI business. Strzok stated:

My general practice was not to use personal email for FBI business. The
times that I did it was when it wasn't possible or there, there were
problems with the FBI systems. In the case of I think the one issue that
came out was.the one about the draft affidavit for the Weiner laptop.

Our phones at the time had significant limitations specifically to that.
You couldn't view redlines. And so, and, but yet you could on an iPhone.
So I remember in the case of that search warrant forwarding it over so I
could see what DOJ changed and their comment bubbles in regard to that.
There were some other times where I was either out of the office. I
think a lot of those were either I was on travel or certainly over the
weekends. It is very cumbersome on the old iPhones, or on the old
Samsungs of the Bureau because of the way they autocorrect spelling and
the nature of the.keyboard, it is difficult to write anything of
length whatsoever. So there were times that, I mean, I think there's one
where I was very aggravated with a set of circumstances that had
unfolded. I was going to tell my boss about it, and I remember talking
with Lisa Page saying, hey look, did I hit the right tone in this
because I wanted to, you know, just be respectful, but at the same time
convey my frustration.

I wrote that on my home computer, because it's easier to type it out.

I think there was one that might be a holiday greeting that I sent to
Bill Priestap. But, again, the sort of thing that, you know, for,
for convenience, but because on the one hand it was bulky to, our
technology was crappy, and it was impossible on the rare occasion I
would write these things. And then send them to, you know, my account
and forward it on. So it got incorporated and picked up into the FBI
system.

Strzok told us that his understanding was that FBI policy discouraged
the use of personal email and devices, but "there are allowances made"
where "it is not practical or possible to use your FBI device."
Strzok stated that he would double delete any work-related emails in his
personal account.^[^200^](#fn200){#fnref200 .footnote-ref}^

We also identified numerous references in text messages between Page and
Strzok about using "Imessage" (or "Imsg") or a personal email account. A
number of these messages reference work-related discussions on those
forums. We asked Strzok and Page about this. Strzok stated, "Typically,
we would iMessage personal things." We asked Strzok if he and Page ever
exchanged work-related information on iMessage. Strzok told us, "I do
not recall that. I can't exclude it ever, ever happening, but I don't
recall ever sending work-related stuff on, on iMessage."

Page told us that references to these other forums reflected "mostly
personal use" as opposed to using them for work purposes. However, she
stated that she and Strzok sometimes used these forums for work-related
discussions due to the technical limitations of FBI-issued phones. Page
explained:

In particular, the autocorrect function is the bane of literally
every agent of the FBI's existence because those of us who care about
spelling and punctuation, which I realize is a nerdy thing to do, makes
us crazy because it takes legitimate words that are spelled correctly
and autocorrects them into gobbledygook. And so, it is not uncommon for
either one of us to just either switch to our personal phones or, or in
this case, where it was going to be a, a fairly substantive thing that
he was writing, to just save ourselves the trouble of not doing it on
our Samsungs. Because they are horrible and super-frustrating.

Page also noted that she and Strzok would often use personal email
accounts to send news articles to one another.

We refer to the FBI the issue of whether Strzok's use of personal email
accounts violated FBI and Department policies. As noted above, Page left
the Department on May 4, 2018.

**III. Allegations that Department and FBI Employees Improperly
Disclosed Non-Public Information**

Among the issues we reviewed were allegations that Department and FBI
employees improperly disclosed non-public information. We found that
Department and FBI officials raised considerable concerns about alleged
leaks of information, particularly in October 2016, regarding the
Midyear investigation and the Clinton Foundation investigation.

provider's policy applies to opened emails and emails stored for more
than 180 days, which ECPA otherwise permits the government to obtain
using a subpoena and prior notice to the subscriber. *See*

18 U.S.C. § 2703(a), (b)(1)(B)(i); COMPUTER CRIME AND INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY SECTION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, SEARCHING AND SEIZING
COMPUTERS AND OBTAINING ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE IN CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
at

129-30 (2009). In addition, although we learned that a non-FBI family
member had access to Strzok's personal email account in 2017, Strzok
told the OIG that no one else had access to his personal email account
during the period in question (*i.e.*, late October 2016).

As we describe in Chapter Eleven of this report, Lynch and Comey
discussed their concerns about leaks on October 31, 2016. Additionally,
on October 26, 2016, Lynch raised her concerns about leaks with McCabe
and the head of the FBI New York Field Office (NYO), with specific focus
on leaks regarding the FBI's high-profile investigation into the death
of Eric Garner, as we detailed in our February 2018 misconduct report
concerning McCabe.^[^201^](#fn201){#fnref201 .footnote-ref}^ McCabe told
us that he "never heard Lynch use more forceful language." The head
of FBI NYO confirmed that the participants got "ripped by the AG on
leaks." These widespread concerns about leaks led Comey, following the
2016 election, to instruct the FBI's Inspection Division (INSD) to
investigate whether confidential information was being improperly
disclosed by any FBI employees.^[^202^](#fn202){#fnref202
.footnote-ref}^

Concerns about the impact of possible leaks on the Midyear
investigation, particularly in the October 2016 time period, are
described in Chapters Ten and Eleven. Several FBI officials told us that
their concerns about potential leaks were a factor that influenced them
in the discussions about the possibility of sending a notification
letter to Congress on October 28, 2016, regarding the FBI's discovery of
Clinton-related emails on the Weiner laptop. As then FBI General Counsel
Baker starkly characterized that decision to us, "If we don\'t put
out a letter, somebody is going to leak it."

Against this backdrop, and as noted at the time the OIG announced this
review, we examined allegations that Department and FBI employees
improperly disclosed non-public information. We focused, in particular,
on the April/May and October 2016 time periods. We have profound
concerns about the volume and extent of unauthorized media contacts by
FBI personnel that we have uncovered during our review.

Our ability to identify individuals who have improperly disclosed
non-public information is often hampered by two significant factors.
First, we frequently find that the universe of Department and FBI
employees who had access to sensitive information that has been leaked
is substantial, often involving dozens, and in some instances, more than
100 people. We recognize that this is a challenging issue, because
keeping information too closely held can harm an investigation and the
supervision of it. Nevertheless, we think the Department and the FBI
need to consider whether there is a better way to appropriately control
the dissemination of sensitive information.

Second, although FBI policy strictly limits the employees who are
authorized to speak to the media, we found that this policy appeared to
be widely ignored during the period we
reviewed.^[^203^](#fn203){#fnref203 .footnote-ref}^ We identified
numerous FBI employees, at all levels of the organization and with no
official reason to be in contact with the media, who were nevertheless
in frequent contact with reporters. The large number of FBI employees
who were in contact with journalists during this time period impacted
our ability to identify the sources of leaks. For example, during the
periods we reviewed, we identified dozens of FBI employees that had
contact with members of the media. Attached to this report as
Attachments G and H are link charts that reflects the volume of
communications that we identified between FBI employees and media
representatives in April/May and October 2016.^[^204^](#fn204){#fnref204
.footnote-ref}^

In addition to the significant number of communications between FBI
employees and journalists, we identified social interactions between FBI
employees and journalists that were, at a minimum, inconsistent with FBI
policy and Department ethics rules. For example, we identified instances
where FBI employees received tickets to sporting events from
journalists, went on golfing outings with media representatives, were
treated to drinks and meals after work by reporters, and were the guests
of journalists at nonpublic social events. We will separately report on
those investigations as they are concluded, consistent with the
Inspector General (IG) Act, other applicable federal statutes, and OIG
policy.

The harm caused by leaks, fear of potential leaks, and a culture of
unauthorized media contacts is illustrated in Chapters Ten and Eleven,
where we detail the fact that these issues influenced FBI officials who
were advising then Director Comey on consequential investigative
decisions in October 2016. The FBI updated its media policy in November
2017, restating its strict guidelines concerning media contacts, and
identifying who is required to obtain authority before engaging members
of the media, and when and where to report media contact. We do not
believe the problem is with the FBI's policy, which we found to be clear
and unambiguous. Rather, we concluded that these leaks highlight the
need to change what appears to be a cultural attitude. Accordingly, we
recommend that the FBI evaluate whether (a) it is sufficiently educating
its employees about both its media contact policy and the Department's
ethics rules, and (b) its disciplinary penalties are sufficient to deter
such improper conduct.

**CHAPTER THIRTEEN: WHETHER FORMER DEPUTY DIRECTOR ANDREW MCCABE SHOULD
HAVE RECUSED FROM CERTAIN MATTERS**

I.  **Introduction**

In this chapter we address whether former FBI Deputy Director Andrew

McCabe should have recuse himself from the Clinton email server and
Clinton

Foundation investigations prior to November 1,
2016.^[^205^](#fn205){#fnref205 .footnote-ref}^ We also address whether
McCabe violated his recusal obligations after he recused himself from
those investigations on November 1, 2016.^[^206^](#fn206){#fnref206
.footnote-ref}^

I.  **Timeline of Key Events**

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Aug 10, 2014                      | Andrew McCabe becomes Assistant   |
|                                   | Director in Charge of the FBI     |
|                                   | Washington Field Office (WFO).    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Feb 25, 2015                      | McCabe's wife, Dr. Jill McCabe,   |
|                                   | receives a call from the Virginia |
|                                   | Lieutenant Governor's office      |
|                                   | asking her to consider a state    |
|                                   | senate run.                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Mar 7, 2015                       | McCabe accompanies Dr. McCabe to  |
|                                   | Richmond and the two meet with    |
|                                   | Governor McAuliffe to discuss her |
|                                   | potential run for state senate.   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Mar 9-13, 2015                    | McCabe contacts Director Comey's  |
|                                   | Chief of Staff and Deputy         |
|                                   | Director Giuliano to discuss Dr.  |
|                                   | McCabe's potential run.           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Mar 11, 2015                      | McCabe obtains advice from FBI    |
|                                   | ethics official Patrick Kelley    |
|                                   | and FBI General Counsel Baker.    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Mar 12, 2015                      | Dr. McCabe announces candidacy    |
|                                   | for state senate.                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| April 29, 2015                    | McCabe documents his recusal from |
|                                   | all Virginia public corruption    |
|                                   | cases.                            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| July 10, 2015                     | FBI opens the Clinton email       |
|                                   | investigation.                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Fall 2015                         | Dr. McCabe's campaign committee   |
|                                   | (McCabe for Senate) receives      |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | a combined total of \~ \$675,000  |
|                                   | from a Political Action Committee |
|                                   | controlled by McAuliffe           |
|                                   | (\$467,500 in monetary            |
|                                   | contributions) and from Virginia  |
|                                   | Democratic Party (\$207,788 in    |
|                                   | in-kind contributions). McCabe    |
|                                   | states he was not aware of these  |
|                                   | contributions until October 2016. |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Sep 6, 2015                       | McCabe leaves WFO and becomes     |
|                                   | Associate Deputy Director for the |
|                                   | FBI.                              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Nov 3, 2015                       | Dr. McCabe defeated in state      |
|                                   | senate election.                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| January 2016                      | FBI opens Clinton Foundation      |
|                                   | investigations.                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Feb 1, 2016                       | McCabe becomes Deputy Director    |
|                                   | for the FBI.                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Oct 23, 2016                      | The *Wall Street Journal*         |
|                                   | publishes article disclosing      |
|                                   | McAuliffe contributions to Dr.    |
|                                   | McCabe's campaign, triggering     |
|                                   | discussions with Director Comey   |
|                                   | about whether McCabe should be    |
|                                   | recused from Clinton-related      |
|                                   | investigations.                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Nov 1, 2016                       | McCabe formally recuses himself   |
|                                   | from participating in             |
|                                   | Clintonrelated investigations,    |
|                                   | but the decision is not announced |
|                                   | externally and only to a limited  |
|                                   | group internally.                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

I.  **Relevant Standards and Procedures**

In this section we summarize the statutes, regulations, and FBI policies
relevant to the conflict of interest and recusal issues.

I.  A.  **Financial Conflict of Interest Statute**

18 U.S.C. § 208 is the criminal conflict of interest statute addressing
financial interest conflicts. It prohibits an executive branch employee
from "participating personally and substantially" in a particular matter
in which the employee knows he (or other persons whose interests are
imputed to him, including the employee's spouse) have a disqualifying
financial interest. The particular matter must also have "a direct and
predictable effect" on the financial interest. 5 C.F.R. § 2635.402.
Direct and predicable effect is defined by regulations to include "a
close causal link between any decision or action to be taken in the
matter and any expected effect of the matter on the financial interest."
5 C.F.R. § 2635.402(b)(1). However, a particular matter does not have a
direct effect on a financial interest, "if the chain of causation is
attenuated or is contingent upon the occurrence of events that are
speculative or that are independent of, and unrelated to, the matter."
*Id*.

I.  A.  **Executive Branch Regulations Addressing Appearance Concerns
        and Impartiality in Performing Official Duties**

The Office of Government Ethics (OGE) promulgates the *Standards of
Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch* (Standards of
Ethical Conduct or OGE regulations). *See* 5 C.F.R. Chapter XVI,
Subchapter B., Part 2635. 5 C.F.R.

§ 2635.101 identifies general principles applying to all executive
branch employees. One principle addresses appearance concerns and states
that: "employees shall endeavor to avoid any actions creating the
appearance that they are violating the law or the ethical standards set
forth in this part."^225^ 5 C.F.R. § 2635.101(b)(14).

*See* *also* Executive Order 12674 (as modified by Executive Order
12731) on Principles of Ethical Conduct for Government Officers and
Employees, section 101(n).

Conflicts of interest for federal employees are addressed in the OGE
regulations at 5 C.F.R. §§ 2635.401 -- 2635.403 and 2635.501 --
2635.503. Section 502(a), relating to "Personal and business
relationships," provides:

Where an employee knows that a particular matter involving specific
parties is likely to have a direct and predictable effect on the
financial interest of a member of his household, or knows that a person
with whom he has a covered relationship is or represents a party to such
matter, and where the employee determines that the circumstances would
cause a reasonable person with knowledge of the relevant facts to
question his impartiality in the matter, the employee should not
participate in the matter unless he has informed the agency designee of
the appearance problem and received authorization from the agency
designee in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section.

5 C.F.R. § 2635.502(a).

Section 502(a) thus identifies two categories of circumstances creating
conflicts of interest that require recusal. The first is where an
employee knows that a "particular matter involving specific parties is
likely to have a direct and predicable effect on the financial interest
of a member of his household." Section 402(b)(1) defines "direct and
predicable effect," as described above in connection with 18 U.S.C. §
208.

The second category of conflict requiring recusal occurs if the employee
knows that a person with whom the employee has a "covered relationship"
is or represents a party to the "particular matter." Section 502(b)
defines "covered relationships" to include, among other things, persons
who are members of the employee's household, persons who are relatives
with whom the employee has a

^225^ 5 C.F.R. § 2635.101(b)(8) is the general principle which states
that "employees shall act impartially and not give preferential
treatment to any private organization or individual." In this chapter we
address McCabe's recusal obligations and do not discuss whether McCabe's
conduct demonstrated that he acted with bias or partiality.

"close personal relationship," and persons with whom the employee has
certain financial relationships. 5 C.F.R. § 2635.502(b).

Where either of these two circumstances is present and the employee
determines that these circumstances "would cause a reasonable person
with knowledge of the relevant facts to question the employee's
impartiality in the matter, the employee should not participate in the
matter" unless he or she has obtained authorization to do so from a
designated agency ethics official. 5 C.F.R. § 2635.502(a). Thus, the
"reasonable person" test is the standard for determining whether the
circumstances could raise a fair question about an employee's
impartiality thereby creating an appearance
concern.^[^207^](#fn207){#fnref207 .footnote-ref}^ Section 502
encourages the employee to seek the assistance of his supervisor, an
agency ethics official, or the agency designee in making a recusal
determination. 5 C.F.R.

§ 2635.502(a)(1). Section 502 also empowers the employee's supervisor to
request the agency designee to make a determination about whether
recusal is required. 5 C.F.R. § 2635.502(c). The agency designee may
also make such a determination on his or her own initiative. *Id*.

In addition to the specific circumstances described above, section
502(a)(2) contains a catchall provision that addresses impartiality
concerns in any "other circumstances." It states:

An employee who is concerned that circumstances other than those
specifically described in this section would raise a question regarding
his impartiality should use the process described in this section to
determine whether he should or should not participate in a particular
matter.

Section 502(a)(2) gives the employee the option to invoke the section
502 process (i.e., seeking a recusal determination or waiver from the
agency designee) for these "other circumstances." *See also* 5 C.F.R. §
2635.501(a). For example, where the unique circumstances of "a personal
friendship, or a professional, social, political or other association
not specifically treated as a covered relationship" raise an appearance
question, the employee may elect to use the section 502 process. Office
of Government Ethics (OGE) 99 x 8, Memorandum to Designated Agency
Ethics Officials Regarding Recusal Obligation and Screening
Arrangements, April 26, 1999 at 2.

The OGE has made clear that while employees are "encouraged" to use the
process provided by section 502 (a)(2), "the election not to use
that process should not be characterized, however, as an 'ethical
lapse.'" OGE 94 x 10(1), Letter to a Departmental Acting Secretary,
March 30, 1994; *see also*, OGE 01 x 8 Letter to a Designated Agency
Ethics Official, August

23, 2001. Further, a note in section 502 states that "nothing in
this section

shall be construed to suggest that an employee should not participate in
a matter because of his political, religious or moral views."

A recused employee is prohibited from participating in the matter unless
authorized by the agency designee based on a determination that the
Government's interest "in the employee's participation outweighs the
concern that a reasonable person may question the integrity of the
agency's programs and operations." 5 C.F.R. § 2635.502(d). The
authorization could allow for partial participation by adjusting the
employee's duties to "reduce or eliminate the likelihood that a
reasonable person would question the employee's impartiality." 5 C.F.R.
§ 2635.502(d)(6).

**C. Department of Justice Regulation Requiring Disqualification Arising
from Personal or Political Relationships**

28 C.F.R. § 45.2 is a Department of Justice regulation which addresses
recusal arising from a Department employee's personal or political
relationships.^227^ Section 45.2(a) states that no Department employee
"shall participate in a criminal investigation or prosecution if he has
a personal or political relationship with" any person or organization
that is the subject of the investigation or prosecution or with any
person or organization that the employee "knows has a specific and
substantial interest that would be directly affected by the outcome of
the investigation or prosecution."

Section 45.2(c)(1) defines "political relationship" to mean:

A close identification with an elected official, a candidate
(whether or not successful) for elective, public office, a political
party, or a campaign organization, arising from service as a principal
adviser thereto or a principal official thereof.

In an April 2017 memorandum, the FBI's then-chief ethics official, while
acknowledging that the syntax of this definition is not "crystal clear,"
wrote that section 45.2(c)(1) appears to require that in order to have a
"close identification" with an elected official or candidate, the
"employee must be or have been a 'principal adviser' to the official or
candidate."^228^

Section 45(c)(2) defines "personal relationship" in part to mean "a
close and substantial connection of the type normally viewed as likely
to induce partiality." It presumes an employee has a personal
relationship with a parent, sibling, child, or spouse, and states that
whether an employee's relationships are "'personal' must

227. 28 C.F.R. § 45.2 implements 28 U.S.C § 528, which states that the
    Attorney General shall promulgate rules and regulations which
    require the disqualification of Department Employees "from
    participation in a particular investigation or prosecution if such
    participation may result in a personal, financial, or political
    conflict of interests, or the appearance thereof."
228. Patrick W. Kelley, Deputy Designated Agency Ethics Official &
    Assistant Director, Office of Integrity and Compliance, FBI,
    memorandum for the FBI Deputy Director, Recusal, April 11, 2017.
    Kelley retired from the FBI on February 28, 2018.

be judged on an individual basis with due regard given to the subjective
opinion of the employee."

Unlike other ethics provisions that contain language imputing to the
employee a relative or spouse's conflicts of interest, section 45.2 does
not have language imputing to the Department employee a relative or
spouse's political or personal relationships.

Section 45.2(b) requires an employee "who believes that his
participation may be prohibited by paragraph (a) of this section" to
report the matter to his supervisor. If the supervisor determines that
the employee has a personal or political relationship as described in
paragraph (a), "he shall relieve the employee from participation" unless
he determines that the relationship will not render the employee's
"service less than fully impartial and professional," and the

"participation would not create an appearance of a conflict of interest
likely to affect the public perception of the integrity of the
investigation or prosecution."

**D. What Constitutes "Participation" Under the Regulations**

18 U.S.C. § 208 prohibits an employee from participating "personally and
substantially" in a matter in which he has a disqualifying financial
interest. *See* *also* 18 U.S.C § 207(a)(1). The OGE regulations define
"personal and substantial" and states in part: "to participate
substantially means that the employee's involvement is of significance
to the matter...it requires more than official responsibility,
knowledge, perfunctory involvement, or involvement on an administrative
or peripheral issue." 5 C.F.R. § 2635.402(b)(4).

In contrast, 5 C.F.R. § 2635.502 and 28 C.F.R. § 45.2 both use the term
"participate" without qualification and neither the OGE nor DOJ
regulations contain definitions describing the type of "participation"
to be avoided by recused employees. Section 502(e) states that
"disqualification is accomplished by not participating in the
matter." The OGE has provided general guidance on the scope of an
employee's recusal obligations and stated that a proper recusal requires
"that an employee avoid any official involvement in a covered matter."
OGE 99 x 8 at 2. The OGE has offered the following advice to ethics
officials to share with employees who "may not fully appreciate the
meaning of the term 'recuse'":

An employee should refrain, abstain, refuse, relinquish, forebear,
forgo, hold off, keep away, give up, decline, desist, discontinue, end,
cancel, close, quit, terminate, stop, halt, cease, drop, stay away,
shun, avoid participation in the matter before him or her. In other
words, just don't do it.

*Id*. at n.2.

**E. FBI Procedures and Ethics Officials**

The Department's ethics program is administered by the Designated Agency
Ethics Official (DAEO), the Assistant Attorney General for
Administration, and the

Departmental Ethics Office. *See* DOJ Order 1200.1, part 11, chapter
11-1, B.1, 4.

The Deputy Designated Agency Ethics Official (Deputy DAEO) is the person
to whom the DAEO delegates the responsibility and authority for the
management of the ethics program within each Department component. *Id*.
at B.3. Patrick W. Kelley was the FBI's Deputy DAEO and Assistant
Director for the FBI's Office of Integrity and Compliance during the
time period of our review.

The FBI Director's authority as the FBI's Agency Designee has been
delegated to the FBI's Deputy DAEO. *See* James B. Comey, Director,
Federal Bureau of Investigation, memorandum for Lee J. Lofthus,
Assistant Attorney General for Administration, Department of Justice,
November 12, 2013 at 2.

Consequently, for FBI employees---including the Deputy Director of the
FBI---the FBI's Deputy DAEO may make ethics determinations on his own,
without approval or consultation with the Department's DAEO, the
Departmental Ethics Office, or the FBI
Director.^[^208^](#fn208){#fnref208 .footnote-ref}^

Within the FBI, all Chief Division Counsel (CDC) and other employees
designated by the Deputy DAEO may act as "ethics counselors." FBI Ethics
and Integrity Program Policy Guide, 2.2.3(a). Ethics counselors' duties
include providing advice regarding the standards of ethical conduct to
employees in their offices, channeling questions requiring formal ethics
determinations to the Deputy DAEO and forwarding any written advice to
the Deputy DAEO. *Id* at 2.2.3(b). Employees with ethics questions are
directed to contact the ethics counselors designated in their respective
offices. *Id*. at 2.3(b). FBI policy states that disciplinary action is
generally not taken against an employee who engaged in conduct relying
in good faith on the advice of an ethics counselor. *Id*. at 2.3(c)

**IV. Factual Findings**

**A. Background Facts**

**1. Andrew McCabe**

McCabe began his career with the FBI in 1996 as a Special Agent in the
New York Field Office. McCabe served in a variety of leadership
positions in the FBI during his career, including as Assistant Director
for the Counterterrorism Division and Executive Assistant Director for
the National Security Branch. He served as

Assistant Director in Charge (ADIC) of the FBI's Washington Field Office
(WFO) from

August 2014 until September 2015. On September 6, 2015, McCabe became
Associate Deputy Director of the FBI, responsible for the FBI's
non-operational divisions. On February 1, 2016, McCabe became Deputy
Director of the FBI, overseeing all FBI domestic and international
investigative and intelligence activities. McCabe became Acting Director
of the FBI on May 9, 2017, when FBI Director James Comey was fired.
McCabe served as Acting Director until August 2,

2017, when Christopher Wray became the new FBI Director. At that time,
McCabe resumed his duties as Deputy Director, a position he held until
January 29, 2018, at which point he went on annual leave but remained an
FBI employee. In February 2018, the OIG issued a misconduct report
regarding McCabe to the FBI.^[^209^](#fn209){#fnref209 .footnote-ref}^
On March 16, 2018, Attorney General Sessions terminated McCabe's
employment with the FBI.

2.  **FBI Clinton Investigations**

The FBI opened the Clinton server email investigation when McCabe was
the ADIC of WFO and opened the Clinton Foundation investigations after
McCabe became FBI Associate Director.

2.  **Dr. McCabe Meets Governor McAuliffe in February 2014**

In February 2014, then-Governor Terry McAuliffe visited the hospital
where Dr. Jill McCabe practiced to advocate for expansion of Medicaid
coverage in Virginia. McCabe told us that, by coincidence, his wife, Dr.
McCabe, was working at the hospital that day and was present at the time
of Governor McAuliffe's visit. McCabe told the OIG that Dr. McCabe had
not previously met Governor McAuliffe until his visit to her hospital
that day.

2.  **Recruitment to Run for Virginia State Senate in February 2015**

A year later, on February 25, 2015, Dr. McCabe received a phone call
from an aide to then-Virginia Lieutenant Governor Ralph Northam. That
day, Dr. McCabe emailed her husband and said the aide had asked if she
would consider running for Virginia State Senate against the incumbent
in District 13. McCabe told us that Dr. McCabe had not previously met
Lieutenant Governor Northam.

McCabe said that Dr. McCabe was subsequently invited to, and agreed to
attend, a Democratic caucus meeting in Richmond on March 7, 2015, which
would provide an opportunity for her to discuss a potential run with
other elected officials.

According to McCabe, a Virginia State Senator told Dr. McCabe that
Governor McAuliffe was scheduled to speak at the meeting and they might
have an opportunity to speak to him as well, although it was "not a
guarantee" that they would talk with the Governor.

**5. The McCabes' Meeting with Governor McAuliffe in March 2015**

McCabe accompanied Dr. McCabe on her trip to Richmond on March 7.

a.  **Conversation with Richmond Special Agent in Charge (SAC) on March
    6**

McCabe said the day before the March 7 trip he spoke to the Special
Agent in Charge of the FBI's Richmond Field Division (Richmond-SAC), to
let him know he would be in Richmond with Dr. McCabe because she was
considering a state senate run and they were going to a meeting "to talk
with more people about this prospect." McCabe also said he talked to
Richmond-SAC to get his impressions on Richmond and the state
legislature and that Richmond-SAC "was very positive about it." McCabe
told the OIG that Richmond-SAC was the first FBI employee with whom he
discussed the March 7 trip.

Richmond-SAC told us that McCabe called to tell him he would be coming
to Richmond with his wife to meet with the Governor as she was
considering a run for office. Richmond-SAC said McCabe asked if he would
"get in the way of anything" by going to meet with state legislators.
Richmond-SAC said he did not have any investigative concerns with him
meeting the Governor or state legislators, although he warned McCabe
that if McCabe met with Governor McAuliffe, he would "be tethered to the
Clintons" forever, and this could impact McCabe's future in government.

a.  **The McCabes' Meeting with McAuliffe on March 7**

McCabe told us that on March 7 he and Dr. McCabe drove to Richmond for
the Democratic caucus meeting where they met with a Virginia State
Senator. According to McCabe, the State Senator told them "there's been
a change of plans" and that Governor McAuliffe wanted to speak to Dr.
McCabe at the Governor's mansion. The three then drove to the mansion in
the McCabes' car.

McCabe said they met with Governor McAuliffe at the mansion for 30 to 45
minutes. He said the Governor made it very clear that his number one
priority was expanding Medicaid, and that "they" (from the context,
apparently referring to the Virginia Democratic Party and himself)
planned to target a few state senate seats. McCabe said the Governor
explained why they thought Dr. McCabe would be a good candidate and that
he said she could expect to spend a lot of time fundraising. According
to McCabe, Governor McAuliffe said that he and the Democratic Party
would support Dr. McCabe's candidacy. However, McCabe told us to the
best of his recollection they did not discuss financial support nor did
they say they would support Dr. McCabe "in the form of financial
backing." McCabe also said there was no mention of the Governor's
Political Action Committee (PAC), the Clintons, or Clintons' associates
providing financial assistance. McCabe said that Dr. McCabe asked
McAuliffe questions about the nature, demands, and logistics of the
legislative session and the amount of time she would have to spend in
Richmond because she "had no intention ever of leaving her medical
profession." McCabe said the Governor asked him about his occupation and
McCabe told him he worked for the FBI but that they did not discuss
McCabe's work or any FBI business.

According to McCabe, after the meeting at the Governor's mansion, he and

Dr. McCabe rode with the Governor to a hotel, where the Governor
delivered his speech. McCabe said they were at the hotel for 20 to 25
minutes, standing in the audience listening to the speech and returned
with the Governor to the mansion where the McCabes had left their car.
McCabe said they stayed for another 20 to 30 minutes at the mansion for
an unrelated event before returning home in their
car.^[^210^](#fn210){#fnref210 .footnote-ref}^ McCabe told us the March
7 meeting was the first and only time he had ever met McAuliffe.

**c. Follow-up Conversation with Richmond SAC on March 8**

Richmond-SAC told us that McCabe called him probably the following day
(March 8) and described the meeting with Governor McAuliffe. According
to Richmond-SAC, McCabe said it was a "surreal meeting" with the
Governor at the mansion. Richmond-SAC said McCabe told him that from the
mansion they were whisked away to a function at a hotel and that the
Governor, without Dr. McCabe having committed to a run, introduced her
as someone that they believed could unseat the incumbent senator in
District 13. Richmond-SAC said McCabe told him that he would address any
ethics issues.

**6. Dr. McCabe's Campaign**

Dr. McCabe announced her run for the Virginia State Senate on March 12,
2015. In FBI responses to Congressional inquiries in December 2016, the
FBI stated that, to the best of McCabe's recollection, his role in Dr.
McCabe's campaign "included providing transportation to his spouse in
their personal vehicle on two occasions to public events; attending one
public debate as a spectator; and appearing in a family photo which was
used in a campaign mailer."^[^211^](#fn211){#fnref211 .footnote-ref}^

Dr. McCabe's campaign committee, McCabe for Senate, received substantial
monetary contributions in 2015 from Common Good VA, a PAC controlled by
thenGovernor McAuliffe, as well as in-kind contributions from the
Virginia Democratic Party. According to state campaign finance records,
Common Good VA donated a total of \$467,500 to McCabe for Senate, the
vast majority of which was contributed in October 2015. The Virginia
Democratic Party provided a total of \$207,788 in the form of campaign
mail production in September and October 2015. The combined total of
\$675,288 from the Governor's PAC and the party represents approximately
40 percent of the total contributions raised by Dr. McCabe for her state
senate campaign during the 2015 election cycle, according to the
records.

On June 26, 2015, Hillary Clinton was the featured speaker at a
fundraiser in Fairfax, Virginia hosted by the Virginia Democratic Party
and attended by Governor

McAuliffe. News accounts at the time indicated that the party raised
more than \$1,000,000 at the fundraiser.^[^212^](#fn212){#fnref212
.footnote-ref}^ McCabe told us he was not aware of the June 2015
fundraiser until the October 2016 news accounts and that neither he nor
his wife attended the event.^[^213^](#fn213){#fnref213 .footnote-ref}^

McCabe told us that during his wife's campaign he was generally unaware
of the nature and source of donations to her campaign, including the
contributions from Governor McAuliffe's PAC and the Virginia Democratic
Party. According to McCabe, he learned of these details for the first
time from the October 23, 2016, *Wall Street Journal* article, discussed
below. He told us he was not aware of the Clintons or anyone on their
behalf ever contributing to Dr. McCabe's campaign.

**B. McCabe Discusses Wife's Candidacy with FBI Officials, Seeks Ethics
Advice, and Recuses from Various FBI Investigations**

**1. Meeting with Comey's Chief of Staff; Extent of Director Comey's
Knowledge or Approval**

McCabe said that the week following the March 7 meeting with Governor
McAuliffe, he spoke to Chuck Rosenberg, Director Comey's then-Chief of
Staff. He said he told Rosenberg that his wife was considering a state
senate run and that they had traveled to Richmond and met with Governor
McAuliffe. McCabe said they had a "fulsome discussion about everything
that was involved," and that he described the information they had
gathered, although he could not recall whether he flagged for Rosenberg
the fact that his wife's campaign could receive financial support from
the Democratic Party or other sources influenced by McAuliffe. McCabe
said he told Rosenberg that his wife would not run if the Director had
"any concerns about it reflecting negatively" on the FBI or McCabe.
McCabe said that Rosenberg called him back a few hours later and said he
had spoken to the Director "and he's totally comfortable with it."
McCabe told us the ethics issues were foremost on his mind and that he
believed he talked to Rosenberg about the efforts he (McCabe) would take
with the FBI's chief ethics official, Patrick Kelley, to address
conflict of interest and recusal issues. McCabe said he believed that
the Director's approval would have been with the understanding that
McCabe would address all conflict and recusal issues as required.

Rosenberg told us that he recollected one brief in-person conversation
in his office with McCabe at the time his wife was considering a run for
the state senate. Rosenberg said that McCabe told him that his wife was
considering a run and asked whether Rosenberg thought that would be
problematic. Rosenberg said he told McCabe he did not believe there
would be any issues with it, but that McCabe should talk to Kelley. He
told us he probably also said to McCabe that he would think about it
further and let McCabe know if something ended up concerning him about
the situation. Rosenberg said he told McCabe that his wife was a private
citizen and so long as her campaign does not interfere with his FBI
work, he did not see why there would be an issue. Rosenberg said he did
not recall a subsequent conversation with Director Comey about this
issue, but he believed McCabe's recollection that Rosenberg called
McCabe back and said the Director had no issue with it was correct
because that sounded like what he would have done.

Rosenberg said the conversation with McCabe was at "a fairly abstract
level" and he assumed that that the ethics questions would be addressed
with Kelley. Rosenberg said he told McCabe as long as "he was careful
about recusals" and talked to Kelley it seemed okay to him.

Comey told us he did not recall Rosenberg having asked him whether he
had any concerns with a potential run for office by ADIC McCabe's wife
at the time she was considering a run. Comey said he believes he learned
for the first time that Dr. McCabe had run for office in a causal
conversation with her at an event in July 2016 (about 8 months after she
lost the election), and that he recalled being surprised about that
fact. Comey told us that assuming McCabe's recollection was accurate,
then it is likely that Rosenberg described the issue in passing to him
and said he had "checked it out and it's all good" and Comey said "ok,
no sweat."

2.  **Conversation with Deputy Director Giuliano**

McCabe told us he also spoke about his wife's potential run with his
direct supervisor, then-Deputy Director Mark Giuliano, on March 9, the
Monday after their visit to Richmond. McCabe said he described the
"whole situation" to Giuliano in a "robust conversation" in which he
described why his wife was interested in a possible run and the
"sensitivities" of her run relative to his position, and that he
identified WFO's public corruption program. He said Giuliano responded
by directing him to talk to Kelley to identify a "clear path forward"
that avoided any Hatch Act or recusal problems. McCabe said Giuliano did
not express any reservations and that Giuliano said "...good for
her...she's getting involved and trying to do the right thing."

By contrast, Giuliano told us that he advised McCabe, when McCabe told
him that his wife was planning to run, that it was a "bad idea."
According to Giuliano, McCabe responded by saying, "she's supported me
for all these years; I need to support her; what do I need to do?"
Giuliano said he told McCabe to consult Kelley and FBI attorneys, and
that he believes McCabe ultimately "dotted every 'I' and crossed every
'T' that he needed to" on the issue. Giuliano also told us that he
ensured that McCabe was recused from appropriate WFO investigations.

2.  **Meeting with Acting Chief Division Counsel on March 10**

McCabe and WFO's Acting Chief Division Counsel (A-CDC), met on March 10,

2015, the day before a meeting McCabe scheduled with Kelley. McCabe said
he

had an in-depth conversation with A-CDC when they met and that he asked
her to attend the meeting with Kelley.

A-CDC confirmed that she and McCabe had a conversation on March 10 in
which McCabe described to her many details, including that he and his
wife had met that weekend with McAuliffe at the governor's mansion.
A-CDC told us, and her contemporaneous notes corroborate, that McCabe
identified public corruption investigations and other areas of potential
conflicts. She said that he wanted her to identify the conflict
parameters he would work under if his wife decided to run. She responded
by suggesting a "taint team" review process to identify potential
conflict cases. A-CDC said that McCabe was also very concerned with
telling WFO employees about his wife's run for fear that they would feel
pressured to vote for her. A-CDC said that McCabe told her that he had
already notified the Director and the Deputy Director.

**4. Meeting with Kelley and Baker on March 11**

McCabe met with Kelley at his office at FBI Headquarters on March 11,
2015. The meeting was also attended by A-CDC and FBI General Counsel
James Baker, who joined halfway through the meeting. According to
McCabe, Kelley addressed two areas in their discussions: the Hatch Act
restrictions on McCabe's activities during the campaign, and conflict of
interest and other issues to consider in the event Dr. McCabe won her
race. They did not discuss how to address donations to Dr. McCabe's
campaign or the possibility that they could create an appearance of a
conflict of interest if made by individuals who may be under
investigation by the FBI, or closely affiliated with individuals under
investigation by the FBI. McCabe said that they also discussed a process
in which ongoing and future cases would be identified for potential
recusal, with A-CDC serving as a "filter" of cases and the WFO's Special
Agents in Charge (SACs) tasked with bringing potential conflict cases to
A-CDC for a recusal decision. McCabe said that in the meeting they
"hammered out the details of how they would do this collaboratively" and
that Kelley was satisfied that such a process was "an abundantly
cautious way to approach the issue." McCabe said that they had minimal
discussion regarding considerations in the event Dr. McCabe won, but
that Kelley said a win by her might trigger other recusal issues and
that they would "cross that bridge" when they got to it.

According to McCabe, the filtering arrangement they discussed was to
take effect immediately. McCabe told us that in the March 11 meeting it
was his "strong belief" that his wife would run because the "all-clear
report" from Rosenberg was the "last hurdle" prior to her decision to
run. Dr. McCabe announced her run for the state senate the next day,
March 12, 2015.

According to A-CDC, during the March 11 meeting Kelley and Baker were
concerned with potential Hatch Act violations and said they did not
think there would be case conflict of interest issues unless Dr. McCabe
won her election. ACDC told us that McCabe said they should nonetheless
proceed as if there are conflicts of interest.

Kelley told us that Hatch Act considerations were the focus of most of
the March 11 meeting. Kelley said that once the Hatch Act questions were
resolved they discussed what to do with WFO investigations and that
McCabe, A-CDC, or both said they had put measures in place to screen
investigations for conflicts. Kelley's notes of the March 11 meeting are
contained in an Ethics Advice Tracker, an OIC electronic form used to
memorialize advice provided. The Tracker stated that in the meeting they
"reviewed disqualification/recusal requirements" and that McCabe had
"already put in place filtering arrangements within his office." A-CDC
said that they did not memorialize a filter process or issue written
instructions immediately, but that they put in place a "stopgap measure"
of funneling all public corruption matters through the Criminal Division
SAC, Acting SAC, or someone from the CDC's office to assess potential
conflicts until they had implemented a formal process.

McCabe told us that after the March 11 meeting, he expected A-CDC to
document the recusal, speak to the Acting SAC about the filtering
process, and work with the Acting SAC to list any cases from which he
would be recused. McCabe said that he did not necessarily expect to hear
about the specific cases that he had been recused from. McCabe told us
that at a regularly scheduled meeting of the WFO SACs, the same week as
the March 11 meeting, he informed the SACs of his wife's decision to run
for state senate and of the filtering arrangement that they had put in
place for identifying potential conflict cases.

**5. McCabe Recusal EC Issued on April 29**

The A-CDC documented McCabe's recusals in an Electronic Communication
(EC) dated April 29, 2015, which was approved by
McCabe.^[^214^](#fn214){#fnref214 .footnote-ref}^ The EC was sent to all
of the WFO's SACs and began by referencing Dr. McCabe's run for state
senate and stating that prior to her announcement, McCabe had consulted
FBI officials "to identify limitations on his participation in her
campaign and to identify areas where Dr. McCabe's campaign may present
potential conflicts of interest." It then referenced the March 11
meeting and stated that they had "also addressed with AD

Kelley and GC Baker the potential for conflicts of interest." The EC
stated that ACDC and the Acting SAC of the Criminal Division (A-SAC), in
which the public corruption squads were located, had "identified several
areas" where McCabe's "dissociation would be appropriate," including:

All public corruption investigations arising out of or otherwise
connected to the Commonwealth of Virginia present potential conflicts,
as Dr. McCabe is running for state office and is supported by the
Governor of Virginia. Therefore, out of an abundance of caution, the
ADIC will be excluded from any involvement in all such cases.

The April 29 EC then stated that supervising case agents in the WFO's
Criminal Division had conducted "an initial review" of pending
investigations to identify cases that present a potential conflict of
interest, that these cases were identified to ACDC and would be included
in the matters in which McCabe "may take no part, either by being
briefed or in the decision-making process."

The EC next identified a screening protocol for future or other ongoing
cases requiring the CDC to review any investigations that may present
"an actual or perceived conflict of interest" and make the recusal
determination. The EC concluded by stating: "This protocol will be
reassessed and adjusted as necessary and at the conclusion of Dr.
McCabe's campaign in November, 2015."

A-CDC told us she did not recall why she did not document the recusal
until April 29 and that it was "always the plan" to memorialize the
recusal in an EC.

C.  **No Reassessment of Conflict/Recusal when McCabe becomes ADD or
    after Dr. McCabe Loses Election**

McCabe left the WFO and became the FBI's Associate Deputy Director (ADD)
in September 2015, while his wife's campaign was ongoing. The ADD
primarily has administrative responsibilities rather than operational
ones.

When we asked McCabe if he had any conversations with anyone about
whether the April 29 EC and its provisions traveled with him to his new
position as ADD, he said he did not recall having any such
conversations.

Dr. McCabe lost her race for the state senate on November 3, 2015. As
noted above, the April 29 EC stated that the recusal protocol would "be
reassessed and adjusted ... at the conclusion of Dr. McCabe's campaign
in November 2015." When we asked McCabe about the language related to
reassessment, he told us no one approached him at the end of his wife's
campaign to discuss the issue with him.

C.  **Participation in Clinton Email and Clinton Foundation
    Investigations**

    1.  **McCabe Not Recused as ADIC, ADD, or DD**

As described in this report, until he recused himself from the Clinton
email and Clinton Foundation investigations on November 1, 2016, McCabe
had an active role in the supervision of the Clinton email investigation
after he became the Deputy Director in February 2016. He also had
oversight of the Clinton Foundation investigations when he became Deputy
Director. When McCabe served as ADD, he did not have supervision over
the Clinton email investigation, but he was occasionally present at
meetings where the matter was discussed, according to McCabe and an FBI
response to Congressional inquiries.^[^215^](#fn215){#fnref215
.footnote-ref}^ In July 2015, when the

Clinton email investigation was opened, McCabe was serving as the ADIC
in the WFO. He told us he had no recollection of participating in any
discussions about the opening of the case and only learned after the
fact that the WFO had provided personnel to the Clinton email
investigation team.

C.  1.  **Recusal Concerns Related to Clintons Raised in May 2015 when
        McCabe is ADIC**

McCabe said that he never heard of any concerns that his wife's run for
office presented a conflict for him in Clinton matters until October
2016, as detailed below. He also told us that until that time, he did
not consider addressing a potential Clinton conflict because neither he
nor his wife had any connection to Hillary Clinton, his wife's campaign
received no support from her, and whatever relationship Hillary Clinton
had to Governor McAuliffe did not appear to McCabe to be grounds for a
conflict. We found one instance prior to October 2016 in which concerns
were raised about a potential conflict for McCabe in Clinton-related
matters, although we found no evidence that these concerns were brought
to McCabe's attention. As described below, these concerns were raised by
WFO personnel in May 2015, shortly after the April 29 EC was issued.

**a. Complaint Regarding Clinton**

On May 4, 2015, a private attorney emailed Director Comey to request
that the FBI open a public corruption investigation into Hillary
Clinton, citing public allegations related to the Clinton Foundation and
her use of a private email server while she was Secretary of State.
Comey forwarded the complaint to Deputy Director Giuliano, who in turn
forwarded it the next day to McCabe, stating:

"provided to WFO for whatever action you deem appropriate."

On May 5, 2015, McCabe, who was out of the country on vacation,
forwarded the email to A-SAC and directed her to have the complaint
reviewed and to contact the private attorney and "conduct a standard
assessment of these allegations." McCabe copied Giuliano on this email.
A few hours later, McCabe sent a follow up email to A-SAC stating, "To
be clear, we are info gathering at this point. Please do not open a case
or assessment until we have the chance to discuss further." A-SAC
responded by stating she understood and added that they had "already
discussed the issue in coordination with the Department's Public
Integrity Section and FBI Headquarters as this is not the first
complaint on this matter. We are following established protocol and
guidelines for these types of complaints." McCabe responded to A-SAC,
"Great. Thanks." He also forwarded to Chuck Rosenberg the first email he
sent to A-SAC and described to Rosenberg his subsequent instructions to
A-SAC to hold off on opening a case or assessment.

Rosenberg told us he vaguely recalled the email thread but he did not
recall McCabe's email to him or his response to McCabe, which was
"understood. enjoy your vacation". He said he does not recall
the email thread prompting any concerns at headquarters about McCabe
working on Clinton matters and that he would not have made a connection
with a Clinton matter and Dr. McCabe and Governor McAuliffe.

b.  **Supervising Case Agent and A-SAC Raise Concerns**

**About McCabe Participating in Decisions Related to Clinton**

A-SAC forwarded the email thread to a supervising case agent in the
Criminal Division the same day who replied "ADIC should recuse himself
from this matter in my opinion." The supervising case agent told us he
was concerned because, among other things, he knew "the Clintons and
McAuliffe are hard to separate," and that McAuliffe ran her 2008
campaign for President. He also described his concerns as being
protective of McCabe's interests by anticipating how any participation
by him on a Clinton matter would play out in the press since "the ADIC's
wife has benefited from her relationship to McAuliffe."

A-SAC told us that her concern on the nature of a potential Clinton
conflict "was overall public corruption, and Clinton specifically
because of just the broader relationship between McAuliffe and Clinton."
A-SAC said she spoke to A-CDC who reached out to Kelley. A-SAC said she
also addressed her concerns with another SAC in WFO and the then-Chief
of the Public Corruption Section of CID (PCS-Chief). PCS-Chief told us
he recalls speaking to A-SAC about concerns she had although he did not
recall the specifics of those concerns or the identity of the matter.
PCSChief told us he passed along A-SAC's concerns to one of his
superiors. A-SAC said she did not know whether PCS-Chief or anyone else
prompted McCabe in the May 5 time period about a potential Clinton
conflict.

b.  **A-CDC and Kelley's Communications and Nonrecusal Decision**

On May 5, A-CDC emailed Kelley and stated:

I have an issue I would like to run by you regarding ADIC McCabe's
potential conflicts of interest and his wife's campaign. Should be
fairly quick, but I would appreciate your opinion on how we are handling
a particular matter.

A-CDC's email to Kelley did not identify the subject of the potential
conflict of interest. Kelley and A-CDC spoke by phone the following
morning, May 6, which Kelley documented in an Ethics Advice Tracker
dated May 7, 2015. In the Tracker, Kelley summarized the advice he
provided to A-CDC as follows:

Q re necessity of recusal of her ADIC. Relates to ADIC's spouse running
for partisan office which we have discussed and worked out recusal
arrangements, etc. This matter concerns a separate investigation where
there may be a relationship between certain persons. Advised that
relationship in the investigations was not enough to warrant recusal.
Details too sensitive to be included here.

A-CDC told us she did not remember why she reached out to Kelley and did
not recall discussing with anyone a potential McCabe conflict with
Clinton-related matters. Likewise, Kelley told us that he did not recall
his conversation with A-CDC or whether the advice memorialized in the
Tracker related to a potential conflict regarding Clinton. (The Tracker
did not reference Clinton or otherwise identify the subject of the
potential conflict of interest.)

Kelley said that the first time he remembers hearing about a recusal
question regarding Clinton-matters was in October 2016, as discussed
below. Kelley also told us that in the May 2015 time frame he would have
said there is no need for McCabe to recuse from Clinton-matters on the
basis of the relationship between Governor McAuliffe and Clinton because
their relationship is tangential: "The question is, are McAuliffe's
relationships to Clinton imputed to Ms. McCabe. And frankly, I think
that's a bridge too far. I can't see that we should impute all of

McAuliffe's relationships to McCabe."

We found no evidence that McCabe was ever made aware of the concerns
raised by A-CDC, A-SAC, or the supervising case agent. We also found no
evidence that Kelley consulted with or questioned McCabe, who was out of
the country on vacation, regarding A-CDC's concerns before reaching his
conclusions and providing the advice to A-CDC on May 7.

**E. Clinton Email and Clinton Foundation Investigations Recusals**

**1. October 23, 2016** ***Wall Street Journal*** **Article**

On October 23, 2016, the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) published online an
article stating that a political-action committee (PAC) run by Virginia
Governor

McAuliffe and the Virginia Democratic Party (over which the article
reported

McAuliffe "exerts considerable control") collectively donated nearly
\$675,000 to the 2015 unsuccessful state senate campaign of the wife of
Andrew McCabe.^237^ The article described McAuliffe as "an influential
Democrat with long-standing ties to Bill and Hillary Clinton" and noted
that McCabe was an FBI official "who later helped oversee the
investigation into Mrs. Clinton's email use." The article contained an
official FBI statement that McCabe "played no role" in his wife's 2015
state senate campaign and was promoted to FBI Deputy Director months
after his wife's defeat

^237^ *See* Devlin Barrett, *Clinton Ally Aided Campaign of FBI
Official's Wife*, WALL ST. J, Oct. 23,

2016,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/clinton-ally-aids-campaign-of-fbi-officials-wife-1477266114
(accessed June 11, 2018). A print version of the article was published
in the WSJ on Monday, October 24, 2016.

"where,...he assumed for the first time, an oversight role in the
investigation into

Secretary Clinton's emails."^[^216^](#fn216){#fnref216 .footnote-ref}^
According to the article, FBI officials stated that McCabe's supervision
of the Clinton email investigation in 2016 did not present a conflict or
ethics issues because his wife's campaign was over by then. The article
went on to note that when the Clinton email investigation was launched
in July 2015, Mr. McCabe was "running the FBI's Washington, D.C., field
office, which provided personnel and resources to the Clinton email
probe."

Among other things, the article stated that McAuliffe could recall
having met only once with McCabe, on March 7, 2015, when he and other
state Democrats met with the couple to urge Dr. McCabe to run. It stated
that after the March 7 meeting, McCabe sought ethics advice from the FBI
"and followed it, avoiding involvement with public corruption cases in
Virginia, and avoiding any campaign activities or events."

**2. Internal Deliberations and Recusals from Clinton Email and Clinton
Foundation Investigations**

Immediately following online publication of the October 23 WSJ article,
there was substantial public discussion as to whether McCabe's oversight
of the Clinton email investigation had been appropriate in light of the
information in the article. In the week that followed the article,
discussions ensued within the FBI over whether McCabe should recuse from
Clinton-related matters. These discussions took on additional
significance on October 27, when Comey was briefed by the FBI Clinton
email investigation team regarding the Weiner laptop issue.

**a. Comey and Baker Responses to Article**

Comey told us he was "frustrated" that he had not known about the facts
raised in the October 23 WSJ article earlier and that he had a
conversation with McCabe about this. Had he known them earlier, Comey
said he believed it "highly likely as a prudential matter" that he would
have had someone else take on McCabe's role in the Clinton email
investigation, even if presented with an opinion from Kelley finding no
requirement for recusal under the ethics rules. Comey said although he
did not believe there was an actual conflict, "because of the nature of
the Clinton email matter" he would not have permitted McCabe to
participate as it would have been "used to undercut the credibility of
the institution." He said, "I don't buy this. I think it's crap, but it
brings a vector of attack to this institution and why would I open a
vector of attack to this institution, its credibility is its bedrock,
when I don't need to."

Comey said that while as a lawyer he could see the alleged conflict was
a "triple bank shot," a few days after the October 23 WSJ article the
necessity of seeking a search warrant on the Weiner laptop was a
"mushroom cloud" making "much more significant" the question of whether
to notify Congress. He said that given these elevated stakes he did not
need the "baggage" of an alleged conflict for McCabe brought into the
decisions that would be "heavily scrutinized" and he did not have time
to "get a legal opinion" or even for "thoughtful analysis" on whether
McCabe should participate in the decisions. He said there was enough in
the news articles to counsel against McCabe's involvement. He said that
while initially he viewed the conflict allegations as "a PR thing" that
needed to be managed, "it became hugely significant to me once the
Clinton email investigation awoke from the dead." Comey said he told
McCabe, "I don't need you on this because I don't see it as that close a
call."^[^217^](#fn217){#fnref217 .footnote-ref}^

Baker told us that in the wake of the October 23 WSJ article, he and
Comey had one-on-one conversations in which they discussed the issues it
raised. Baker said that he believes he and Comey first learned from the
October 23 WSJ article that Dr. McCabe's campaign received large
contributions attributed to McAuliffe. He said he and Comey concluded
that McCabe should recuse himself from the Clinton email investigation
"out of an abundance of caution." Baker said that they agreed that it
would be best if McCabe recused himself rather than being recused by

Comey and that Comey instructed Baker to attempt to persuade McCabe to
do so.

**b. McCabe Excluded from Weiner Laptop Meeting on October 27**

As described above in Chapter Nine, on October 27 at 10:00 a.m., Comey
held a meeting with the Clinton email investigation team to discuss
obtaining a search warrant for a set of Clinton-related emails the FBI
had discovered on a laptop belonging to Anthony Weiner, and taking
additional steps in the Clinton email investigation. Lisa Page, McCabe's
special counsel, attended the meeting. McCabe was out of town, but
joined the meeting via conference call. After the meeting began, Baker
suggested, and Comey agreed, that McCabe should leave the call. Comey
told us that he asked McCabe to drop off the call, and McCabe was

"very unhappy about it."

Accounts differ about the reason stated on the October 27 call for
excluding McCabe. McCabe told the OIG that the reason stated on the call
for dropping him related to the potential for discussion about
classified information. However, Comey, Baker, and Page all told us that
Comey asked McCabe to leave the call out of an abundance of caution
because of appearance issues following revelations in the October 23 WSJ
article about the campaign donations to Dr. McCabe from
McAuliffe-associated PACs.

McCabe discussed the issue of his participation in the Clinton email
matter further with Comey and Baker by telephone later that day. After
these conversations, McCabe sent a text message to Page stating, "I
spoke to both. Both understand that no decision on recusal will be made
until I return and weigh in."

c.  **Baker and Kelley Meet on October 27**

Baker and Kelley met on October 27 to discuss the allegation of a
conflict of interest raised by the October 23 WSJ article. Kelley said
that he concluded, along with Baker, that although the facts did not
require McCabe to recuse, it was "desirable" to recuse because of
appearance concerns, so he recommended it. Baker told us that Kelley
concluded that while McCabe was not legally required to recuse from
Clinton matters he recommended recusal because of appearance concerns
and out of an abundance of caution.

An Ethics Advice Tracker from the October 27 meeting memorializing the
discussion and advice Kelley rendered states:

Cited to and discussed DOJ rule at 28 C.F.R. 45.2, conflict of interest
statute at 18 USC 208, SOC rules on impartiality at 5 CFR 2635.502, and
appearance standard at 5 CFR 2635.101(b)(14). Based on facts, advised
that I saw no legal requirement for disqualification but, on balance,
there was an appearance issue and would recommend recusal.

c.  **Kelley's Rationale for Recusal**

Although Kelley did not issue a formal opinion in October 2016, he told
us that if he had put his advice in writing he was "confident" he would
have said recusal of McCabe in the Clinton-related matters was not
required. He said his recommendation that it was nonetheless desirable
for McCabe to recuse was based on the allegations in the press and
potential adverse publicity for the FBI were McCabe not to recuse, the
fact that the FBI could "avoid a fight" while "preserving its equities"
in having another senior leader take on McCabe's role, and, on a
personal level, making "life easier for the people who are under attack
or under scrutiny." While Kelley said McCabe's recusals were desirable,
he also told us that the question of whether a recusal is required under
the standards of conduct is based on the reasonable person standard,
*see* 5 C.F.R. § 2635.101(b)(14), and not on the "*Washington Post*
test," *i.e.*, the likelihood that certain facts may become the subject
of a news article. He said that while the likelihood of adverse
publicity could factor into the reasonable person standard and that "we
all have in the back of our mind how is this going to read in the
*Post*...we have to make the decision based not on what's in the
*Washington Post* but on what a reasonable person would take away if
that person knew the relevant facts, and sometimes that's very nuanced."
In a memorandum Kelley wrote in April 2017, Kelley described McCabe's
Clinton-related investigation recusals as "not required by law or
regulation" and done by McCabe "out of an abundance of caution, and to
avoid further speculation in some quarters about the propriety of
his continued participation."

Kelley told us he did not believe that a reasonable person would
question McCabe's impartiality because Dr. McCabe had no relationship to
Clinton, and while the relationship between the Governor and Clinton is
close, he did not believe that meant "we can impute that relationship or
should impute that relationship to Ms.

McCabe and then turn around and impute that imputed relationship to Mr.
McCabe...it's too tangential to say recusal is required."

c.  **Baker and McCabe Conversation on October 31**

McCabe and Baker spoke about recusal by phone while McCabe was out of
town on October 27, but no decision was made. McCabe told us he had
conversations with Baker after returning to the office on October 31 and
that Baker said to him that Kelley's view was that he should
recuse.^[^218^](#fn218){#fnref218 .footnote-ref}^ Baker told us that he
had a series of conversations with McCabe culminating in a "very
intense" conversation in which Baker told McCabe that he believed he
needed to recuse himself and that it was better that he do it "than have
the boss order him to do it." He said McCabe "was not happy about it"
and "had lots of questions" and they had a "good argument back and
forth."

McCabe said that he had numerous discussions with Baker and Page during
this time in which he expressed his view that he should not recuse out
of abundance of caution as it "would unfairly create a negative
inference over the work that the Clinton email investigation team
had done with his participation over the previous" months. McCabe
said Baker presented him with his argument that there existed
connections among Hillary Clinton and McAuliffe and his wife, but it
seemed to McCabe to be too "attenuated" to call for recusal.

McCabe said that the size of the contributions that came to light in the
October 23 WSJ article was a relevant new fact for Baker in creating an
appearance concern. McCabe said he countered by arguing that the size of
the contributions should not determine whether a conflict is present,
that you have a conflict at \$1 as you do at \$200,000, and while Baker
agreed with his analysis that there was no legal conflict, Baker was
focused on the "external impression of my involvement in the case."

McCabe said Baker's response to his concerns was to acknowledge that
while he may be right on the law and facts that he was not required to
recuse, Baker believed he should recuse in light of the news article, in
an abundance of caution, for the sake of perception, and given Kelley's
view. McCabe said he believed there was "a very clear inevitable
negative impact to being overly cautious." McCabe said that in his
discussions with Baker he asked whether he would be ordered to recuse
and Baker told him "if the Director thinks you should, then it's better
to recuse yourself than to be...directed; better to recuse
voluntarily, than involuntarily."

f.  **McCabe and Comey Meeting on November 1**

On November 1, McCabe and Comey spoke in the Director's office. McCabe
told us he said to Comey that he did not believe he should recuse from
the Clinton email investigation and presented the arguments he made to
Baker in their earlier conversations. McCabe said that Comey responded
by saying he made a good argument but told him that in light of the
external perception from the negative media attention he should recuse.
McCabe told us that when he argued that his recusal at this late stage
may call into question his earlier participation, Comey acknowledged
that recusal could have such a negative impact, but said that given the
media attention he should nonetheless recuse. McCabe said that although
Comey did not explicitly order him to recuse, given what Baker said
about a request from the Director to recuse, he told Comey that he would
recuse.

Comey told us that in his conversation with McCabe, McCabe said that the
allegations of conflict as to the Clinton email investigation were akin
to a "triple cushion bank shot" and that therefore it was unreasonable
for him to seek an opinion from Kelley on the alleged Clinton conflict.
Comey said McCabe also told him that, although he did not believe there
was a legal basis for recusal, he thought it was "prudent" for him to
step aside.

Comey also said that in a conversation with McCabe he "made clear to him
his disappointment" that these facts were not brought to his
attention earlier.

f.  **November 1 Recusal Emails**

On November 1, soon after his meeting with Comey, McCabe sent emails to

FBI executives and officials overseeing the Clinton Foundation
investigation and the Clinton email investigation informing them that he
was recusing himself from those investigations. The emails stated:

As of today I am voluntarily recusing myself for the ongoing Clinton
email investigation / Clinton Foundation investigation. I will
continue to respond to congressional requests for historical information
as necessary.

McCabe told us that the timing of the recusals from the Clinton
Foundation and Clinton email investigations were not on different tracks
and he believed that a recusal rationale based on a perceived
Clinton-related conflict as to the Clinton email investigation logically
extended to the Clinton Foundation investigation.

The FBI did not publicize McCabe's recusals from these Clinton
investigations despite the rationale that the recusals were at least in
part intended to address the public perception of a potential conflict.
In fact, even within the FBI, McCabe's recusal decision was only shared
with a limited audience, primarily those copied on the email and those
aware of the recusal discussions. McCabe told us that he thought the
decision to recuse was a mistake, so to be "very public" and publicize
it "would just compound the mistake."

**3. Participation in Clinton Foundation Investigation after November
1**

In this section we summarize three instances in which McCabe took
actions related to the Clinton Foundation investigation after his
November 1 recusal.

**a. Call to NY ADIC Following November 3** ***Wall Street Journal***
**Article**

On November 3, 2016, the WSJ published another story on the Clinton

Foundation investigation.^[^219^](#fn219){#fnref219 .footnote-ref}^ That
evening, McCabe emailed the ADIC of the FBI New York Office, William
Sweeney, and stated, "This is the latest WSJ article. Call me tomorrow."
According to Sweeney's calendar notes on November 4 and testimony to the
OIG, McCabe and Sweeney spoke for approximately 10 minutes around 7
a.m., regarding "leaks and WSJ article" and that McCabe was "angry."
Sweeney's calendar notes also reflect that McCabe expressed to him:
"will be consequences and get to bottom of it post election.
Need leaks to stop.

Damaging to org."^[^220^](#fn220){#fnref220 .footnote-ref}^

McCabe told the OIG that he did not recall the details of the
conversation on November 4, but it was "probably about leaks" to the
media. McCabe said he would not have viewed his conversation with
Sweeney as participating in the Clinton Foundation investigation but
rather as a "logical follow-up to an ongoing conversation" he had been
having with Sweeney for several weeks over the general issue of leaks
coming out of the New York office. He said he was not transacting on the
case, making decisions, or asking about the case, but rather telling
Sweeney that he needed to address unauthorized media disclosures by
getting his "people under control." Additionally, McCabe told us he did
not believe his recusal from the Clinton Foundation investigation
encompassed his general responsibilities to address the issue of FBI
leaks.

**b. Email to Kortan on November 3** ***Wall Street Journal***
**Article**

Also on the evening of November 3, McCabe emailed the latest WSJ article
to Kortan and stated: "I am curious as to why I keep stumbling across
these things with no notice whatsoever from my OPA machine?. I would
like to discuss solutions tomorrow." Kortan told us he did not recall
the email from McCabe or any subsequent conversation with McCabe. McCabe
said his email to Kortan was intended to address a "persistent
frustration" he had over not receiving timely notice by OPA of news
articles of interest. McCabe told us he did not know if he had a
subsequent conversation with Kortan in which Kortan provided an
explanation for why OPA did not send him the article. However, McCabe
said that Kortan may not have brought the November 3 WSJ article to his
attention in the first place because McCabe had recused himself from the
Clinton Foundation investigation. When we asked McCabe whether in
retrospect he should have asked Kortan to be briefed or kept up to speed
on matters he was recused from, he said, "no, no" and reiterated that
may have been why Kortan did not bring the article to his attention.

**F. Decision Not to Disclose McCabe's Recusals to Congress**

Soon after the publication of the October 23 WSJ article, the FBI
received three Congressional requests for information regarding the
facts and allegations in the article. One was a letter from Senator
Charles E. Grassley to Director Comey dated October 28, 2016, requesting
answers to 12 questions, including one which stated: "What steps are you
taking to mitigate the appearance of a conflict of interest in the
Clinton email investigation and to reassure Congress and the American
people that the investigation was not subject to political bias?"

On December 14, 2016, the FBI sent its response to Senator Grassley's
letter, signed by the then-Acting Assistant Director (AAD) for the FBI's
Office of Congressional Affairs (OCA). The December 14 letter did not
explicitly address

Senator Grassley's question concerning mitigation steps taken or
otherwise disclose McCabe's November 1 recusal from the Clinton email
investigation. Instead, the last two sentences of the corresponding
paragraph in the final December 14 letter stated:

Dr. McCabe lost the election for state senate on November 3, 2015,
months before Mr. McCabe, as DD, assumed responsibility for the Clinton
email investigation. Based on these facts, it did not appear that there
was a conflict of interest -- actual or apparent -- that required
recusal or waiver.

We attempted to determine who made the decision not to disclose the
November 1 recusal of McCabe from the Clinton email investigation in the
December 14 response to Senator Grassley, and for what reason.

Beginning in early December 2016, the OCA AAD and another OCA staff
member circulated several drafts of the response to Senator Grassley.
One draft included the sentence: "On October ?, 2016, out of an
abundance of caution, Mr. McCabe recused himself from further
participation in the Clinton email investigation." Lisa Page
responded in an email that stated, "No way on that sentence. During
our conversation with Jim Baker last week, both of us expressed
our overwhelming interest in protecting that fact as long as possible."
Page told us she believed the "both of us" reference was to herself and
McCabe, but was not sure. Page told us she believed that McCabe's
recusal, if revealed, would have been misused for political purposes and
further inflamed the claims that Comey and McCabe were biased in favor
of Clinton. Page also said she was not sure who made the ultimate
decision on whether to disclose McCabe's recusal. She said that she did
not know whether McCabe weighed in on this decision.

McCabe told us he did not have a recollection of any discussion,
including with Comey, regarding whether to reveal his recusal from the
Clinton email investigation in the December 14 letter. He said Page's
"protect the fact" comment in her email reflected their thinking at the
time that to reveal that information would create a "potentially
damaging misimpression of the case" and that although he did not recall
specifically discussing this issue with Comey, he believed Comey was
also of that view.

Comey said he had "some recollection" that his Chief of Staff, James
Rybicki, presented him with two options being considered, one sentence
urged by McCabe and his staff would respond narrowly, the other would
volunteer the fact of McCabe's recusal. Comey told us he did not recall
the details of his participation in the decision on how to answer, but
he said he recalled seeing the proposed language and hearing about an
internal conflict that McCabe did not want the FBI to volunteer that he
had recused from the Clinton email investigation. Comey told us that
although he does not recall how he responded to the issue as it was
presented to him, he assumes he would have agreed to the final language
so long as it was "technically accurate I'm okay with answering it
narrowly." Rybicki told us he had a vague recollection of the Grassley
letter, but could not recall any discussions regarding whether to
disclose McCabe's November 1 recusal to Congress or whether the issue
was presented to Comey.

The OCA AAD told us he did not specifically recall who made the decision
not to disclose McCabe's recusal, but that he believes McCabe likely
made the decision. However, the OCA AAD said he did not remember having
a conversation with McCabe about disclosing his recusal in the December
14 letter or providing him a draft with the proffered recusal language
in it.

**V. OIG Analysis**

**A. Recusal Issues**

In this section we analyze whether McCabe should have been recused from
the Clinton investigations prior to November 1, 2016 and whether he
adhered to the terms of his recusal once he was recused.

1.  **Summary of Findings**

We found that McCabe was not required to recuse from the Clinton-related
investigations under section 502(a) or any of the other relevant
authorities. We also determined that, at the time McCabe became Deputy
Director and thus had authority over Clinton-related investigations, no
one in the FBI considered the question of whether Dr. McCabe's campaign
raised recusal concerns as to Clintonrelated investigation. This issue
was not considered until after publication of the October 23 WSJ article
and led to McCabe recusing himself from Clinton-related investigations
on November 1, 2016. We found that McCabe did not fully comply with his
November 1 recusal in a few instances related to the Clinton Foundation
investigation as detailed below.

We found that FBI ethics officials and attorneys did not fully
appreciate the potential significant implications to McCabe and the FBI
from campaign donations to Dr. McCabe's campaign. The FBI did not
implement any review of campaign donations to assess potential conflicts
or appearance issues that could arise from the donations. On this issue,
we believe McCabe did what he was supposed to do by notifying those
responsible in the FBI for ethics issues and seeking their guidance. Had
the FBI put in place a system for reviewing campaign donations to

Dr. McCabe, which were public under Virginia law, the sizable donations
from McAuliffe's PAC and the Virginia Democratic Party may have
triggered prior consideration of the very appearance concerns raised in
the October 23 WSJ article.

1.  **Recusal from Clinton-Related Investigations**

We agree with FBI chief ethics officer Kelley and found that the
relevant authorities did not require McCabe to recuse himself from
Clinton-related investigations. With regard to the financial conflicts
provisions in Sections 208 and 502(a), there is no evidence of any
financial or business ties between the McCabes and the Clintons or their
Foundation. Further, there is no evidence that Hillary Clinton provided
political or financial support to Dr. McCabe's 2015 senate campaign. The
fact that McAuliffe supported Dr. McCabe's campaign, and was a known
associate of Hillary Clinton, did not create any connection between the
Clinton email investigation and Dr. McCabe's financial interests.
Indeed, by the time McCabe became Deputy Director and assumed
supervisory responsibilities for any Clinton-related matters, Dr. McCabe
had already lost her election, and no developments in the
Clinton-related matters could have any plausible impact on Dr. McCabe's
financial interests, let alone a direct and predictable one as required
under Sections 208 or 502(a).

In addition, because neither McCabe nor Dr. McCabe had a political or
personal relationship with Clinton, McCabe was not obligated to recuse
under 28 C.F.R. § 45.2. As discussed above, "political relationship"
under section 45.2 is defined to mean "a close identification with an
elected official, a candidate (whether or not successful) for elective,
public office, a political party, or a campaign organization, arising
from service as a principal adviser thereto or a principal official
thereof." "Personal relationship" is defined as a "close and substantial
connection of the type normally viewed as likely to induce partiality."
Neither McCabe nor Dr. McCabe, who had never even met Clinton, served as
a "principal adviser" to Clinton or had a "close and substantial
connection" to Clinton sufficient to meet the definitions of political
and personal relationships in section 45.2.

Although McCabe was not required by law or regulation to recuse from the

Clinton-related investigations, he recused from these investigations on
November 1,

2016, at the urging of Director Comey, who told us that he did not learn
about

McAuliffe's financial support of Dr. McCabe's candidacy until it was
revealed in the

October 23 WSJ article. Voluntary recusal is always permissible with the
approval

of a supervisor or ethics official, even where the elements in section
502(a) are not present.

We did not find fault with McCabe for not considering, prior to the
October 23 WSJ article, whether to recuse himself under the "other
circumstances" provision of section 502(a)(2) or the "appearance"
provision of section 101(b)(14) of the Standards of Ethical
Conduct.^[^221^](#fn221){#fnref221 .footnote-ref}^ However, we were
troubled by the fact that the FBI ethics officials and attorneys did not
fully appreciate the potential significant implications to McCabe and
the FBI from campaign contributions to Dr. McCabe's campaign and did not
implement any review of those campaign donations. Thus, while the same
factual circumstances that led to McCabe's recusal on November 1, 2016
were present at the time McCabe became Deputy Director on February 1,
2016, the FBI ethics officials, McCabe, and Comey only learned of them
as a result of the October 23 WSJ article. Had the FBI put in place a
mechanism to review the campaign's donation information, it would have
been in a position to consider these issues earlier.

We believe McCabe did what he was supposed to do by notifying those
responsible in the FBI for ethics issues and seeking their guidance.
Thereafter, he was entitled to rely on those ethics officials to
identify any ethics issues that were implicated by Dr. McCabe's
candidacy.

Campaign donations to a spouse's campaign present complicated questions
under section 502(a), as well as under the financial conflict of
interest statute. They also may present significant appearance issues
under section 502(a)(2). The fact that the FBI did not apparently
recognize the issues, and the potential importance of them, became
evident when the October 23 WSJ article was published. Under Virginia
law, the identity of contributors and their donation amounts was
available to the public. Had the FBI reviewed the campaign donations to
Dr. McCabe, they would have observed the \$675,288 from McAuliffe's PAC
and the Virginia Democratic Party, which may have resulted in earlier
consideration of the very appearance concerns raised in the October 23
WSJ article. The predictable result of the WSJ article triggered the
October 2016 controversy, which led to Comey's decision to ask McCabe to
recuse himself from Clinton-related investigations.

We further determined that the FBI's decision to keep McCabe's recusal
from Clinton matters a secret made no sense. The apparent purpose of
that recusal was to address allegations concerning the propriety of
McCabe's continued participation in the Clinton-related investigations,
which would be used to undercut the FBI's credibility. This purpose is
generally accomplished by informing the public that McCabe was recused.
However, the FBI did not publicize McCabe's recusal. As a related
matter, we do not believe that the FBI acted wisely in deciding not to
reveal McCabe's recusal to Senator Grassley in response to a question to
which this fact was reasonably responsive. Again, the recusal decision
served no function in protecting the FBI's reputation if it was kept
secret.

We considered whether McCabe violated his voluntary recusal from
Clintonrelated matters after November 1. Recusal "is accomplished by not
participating in the matter." 5 C.F.R. § 2635.502(e). Exposure to case
related information by a recused employee when attending a meeting or
briefing, including receiving information about news articles related to
the recused matter, is a form of participation that must be avoided. We
found no evidence that McCabe continued to supervise investigative
decisions in the Clinton-related matters after that day. We did find
that McCabe, prompted by a follow-up WSJ article of November 3, 2016,
made inquiries about the steps the FBI was taking to address media leaks
relating to the Clinton Foundation and exhorting managers to stop the
leaking. McCabe's conduct in inquiring about media leaks appears to have
been consistent with instructions that Comey told us he gave McCabe
about taking action on media leaks in the Clinton Foundation
investigation. However, McCabe's conduct was not fully consistent with
his recusal, as the discussion of the Clinton Foundation investigation
in the November 3 WSJ article was the very basis for his call and
admonitions to Sweeney, the NY ADIC. McCabe told us he did not believe
his recusal from the Clinton Foundation investigation encompassed his
general responsibilities to address FBI leaks. But McCabe's November 1
recusal email contained one exception, which allowed him to continue to
respond to Congressional requests for information, and it did not carve
out an exception allowing him to continue addressing the leaks about the
Clinton Foundation investigation.

Similarly, McCabe encroached on his recusal obligations when he
forwarded the November 3 WSJ article to OPA chief Kortan and asked why
he (McCabe) kept seeing such articles without prior notice from OPA.
While McCabe told us that his email to Kortan was intended to express a
generalized frustration with lack of prior notice by OPA, McCabe
acknowledged that he should not have asked Kortan to keep him up to
speed on matters he was recused from. McCabe also said that may have
been the very reason Kortan did not bring the November 3 WSJ article to
his attention.^[^222^](#fn222){#fnref222 .footnote-ref}^

**B. Conclusion**

We agreed with Kelley, the FBI's chief ethics official, that McCabe was
not at any time required to recuse from the Clinton-related
investigations under the relevant authorities. However, following the
October 23 WSJ article and discussions with Comey, McCabe recused from
the Clinton-related investigations on November 1, 2016. Once McCabe
recused himself, he was required to cease participation in those
matters. Voluntary recusal is always permissible with the approval of a
supervisor or ethics official, even where the elements in section 502(a)
are not present. We found that McCabe did not fully comply with his
recusal in a few instances related to the Clinton Foundation
investigation.

We also found that the FBI ethics officials and attorneys did not fully
appreciate the potential significant implications to McCabe and the FBI
from campaign contributions to Dr. McCabe's campaign and did not
implement any review of those campaign donations. We therefore recommend
that ethics officials consider implementing a review of campaign
donations when Department employees or their spouses run for public
office.

**CHAPTER FOURTEEN: WHETHER FORMER ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL PETER J.
KADZIK SHOULD HAVE RECUSED FROM CERTAIN MATTERS**

**I. Introduction**

This chapter addresses allegations that former Department of Justice

(Department or DOJ) Assistant Attorney General (AAG) for the Office of
Legislative

Affairs (OLA) Peter J. Kadzik improperly disclosed non-public
information to the Clinton campaign and/or should have been recused from
participating in certain matters.

The allegations regarding Kadzik stem from the public release of certain
emails of John D. Podesta, Jr., the 2016 chairman of the Hillary Clinton
presidential campaign and longtime friend of Kadzik. Beginning in
October 2016, Wikileaks released Podesta emails, including emails
between Kadzik and Podesta. Among the emails released by WikiLeaks was a
May 19, 2015 email from Kadzik to Podesta with the subject line "Heads
up" and which included information concerning a Department Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) litigation and a congressional oversight hearing.
Shortly before that email, Kadzik had made efforts to assist his son in
obtaining a position with the 2016 Clinton campaign.

On or about November 2, 2016, Department leadership determined that
Kadzik's May 19, 2015 "Heads up" email to the chairman of the Clinton
campaign created an appearance of a conflict of interest and required
Kadzik to recuse himself from Clinton-related matters. The Department's
Office of Professional Responsibility (OPR) subsequently conducted an
inquiry and determined that Kadzik did not disclose privileged or
confidential Department information in the email to Podesta.

The OIG's investigation included reviewing investigative materials,
documents, and emails from several DOJ components including OLA, OPR,
and the Civil Division. The OIG also interviewed numerous witnesses,
including Kadzik, then Principal Assistant Deputy Attorney General
(PADAG) Matt Axelrod, Associate Deputy Attorney General Scott Schools,
and the current and former Departmental Ethics Directors. Two relevant
witnesses who worked in OLA under Kadzik, but are no longer with the
Department, declined our request for an interview or were unable to
schedule an interview.^[^223^](#fn223){#fnref223 .footnote-ref}^

As detailed below, we found that Kadzik demonstrated poor judgment by
failing to recuse himself under Section 502(a)(2) of the Standards of
Ethical Conduct prior to November 2, 2016. First, Kadzik did not
recognize the appearance of a conflict that he himself had created when
he initiated an effort to obtain employment for his son with the Clinton
campaign while he was participating in senior staff meetings where
Clinton-related matters were discussed and signing letters to Congress
regarding Clinton-related matters on behalf of the Department. Second,
Kadzik created an appearance of a conflict when he sent Podesta the
"Heads up" email that included government information about the FOIA
litigation in an effort to be helpful to the Clinton campaign without
knowing whether the information had yet been made public. His
willingness to do so raised a reasonable question about his ability to
act impartially on Clinton-related matters in connection with his
official duties.

Additionally, although Department leadership ultimately decided to
recuse

Kadzik from Clinton-related matters upon learning of Kadzik's "Heads up"
email to Podesta, Kadzik subsequently forwarded several emails
communicating information related to Clinton-related matters within the
Department and indicated his intent to speak with staff about those
matters. We therefore concluded that Kadzik exercised poor judgment by
failing to strictly adhere to his recusal.

Lastly, because the government information in the "Heads up" email had
in fact been released publically, we did not find that Kadzik released
non-public information or misused his official position.

II. **Timeline of Key Events**

  -------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Jun 17, 2014   Kadzik is confirmed as AAG for OLA.
  Jan 25, 2015   FOIA litigation is initiated seeking the release of former Secretary of State Clinton's emails.
  Mar 2, 2015    The New York Times reports that Clinton exclusively used personal email to conduct government business while Secretary of State.
  Apr 12, 2015   Clinton announces candidacy for President of the United States. John Podesta serves as her campaign chairman; Brian Fallon, former DOJ Office of Public Affairs Director, serves as her campaign spokesman; and Jennifer Palmieri serves as her Director of Communications.
  Apr 23, 2015   Kadzik emails Fallon asking for a job for his son with the Clinton campaign.
  Apr 30, 2015   Fallon emails Kadzik asking for his son's resume and stating that Palmieri would be reviewing resumes over the weekend. Kadzik replies, sending his son's resume and noting that Kadzik's wife and Palmieri went to college together.
  May 5, 2015    Kadzik's son emails Podesta his resume and asks for a job with the Clinton campaign. Podesta forwards the email to Palmieri,
  -------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

who replies that Kadzik's wife had contacted her and that she told
Kadzik's wife that there were currently no openings with the campaign
but positions might become available in July. (Email released by
WikiLeaks).

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| May 18, 2015                      | Department files a proposed       |
|                                   | schedule for the release of the   |
|                                   | Clinton emails with the court in  |
|                                   | the FOIA litigation.              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   | Politico reports on the           |
|                                   | Department FOIA filing and        |
|                                   | proposed schedule for the release |
|                                   | of the Clinton emails.            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| May 19, 2015                      | Kadzik sends Podesta the "Heads   |
|                                   | up" email about the FOIA filing   |
|                                   | and proposed schedule for the     |
|                                   | release of the Clinton emails,    |
|                                   | and about a congressional         |
|                                   | oversight hearing, which could    |
|                                   | include questions about the       |
|                                   | Clinton emails. (Email released   |
|                                   | by WikiLeaks).                    |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | Civil Division Chief testifies at |
|                                   | the congressional oversight       |
|                                   | hearing.                          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Jul 10, 2015                      | FBI opens the Clinton email       |
|                                   | investigation.                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Jan 2016                          | FBI opens Clinton Foundation      |
|                                   | investigation.                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Nov 1, 2016                       | WikiLeaks releases the May 5      |
|                                   | email chain that begins with      |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | Kadzik's son asking Podesta for a |
|                                   | job with the Clinton campaign.    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Nov 2, 2016                       | WikiLeaks releases Kadzik's May   |
|                                   | 19 "Heads up" email to Podesta.   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| \~ Nov 2, 2016                    | PADAG Axelrod tells Kadzik to     |
|                                   | recuse himself from               |
|                                   | Clintonrelated matters.           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Nov 8, 2016                       | Presidential Election             |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Dec 2016                          | OPR conducts an inquiry and finds |
|                                   | that Kadzik did not send          |
|                                   | privileged or confidential        |
|                                   | information in his May 19, 2015   |
|                                   | "Heads up" email to Podesta.      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Jan 19, 2017                      | Kadzik's last day with the        |
|                                   | Department.                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

II. **Relevant Standards**

In this section we identify the regulations from the Standards of
Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch Standards of
Ethical Conduct), 5 C.F.R. Part 2635, relevant to our analysis.

II. A.  **Personal and Business Relationships Creating an Appearance of
        a Conflict 5 C.F.R. § 2635.502**

Personal and Business Relationships Creating an Appearance of a Conflict
5 C.F.R. § 2635.502 (Section 502) establishes the analytical framework
for determining when a federal employee has an appearance of a conflict
of interest. As discussed in greater detail in Chapter Thirteen of this
report, Section 502 requires an employee to consider the appearance of
his participation in a particular matter involving specific parties (1)
that is likely to have a direct and predictable effect on the financial
interest of a household member or (2) if the employee has a covered
relationship with someone who is a party or represents a party to the
matter. Section 502 also includes catchall provision which may apply to
"other circumstances" that would lead a reasonable person to question an
employee's impartiality in a matter.

A recused employee is prohibited from participating in the matter unless
authorized by the agency designee based on a determination that the
Government's interest "in the employee's participation outweighs the
concern that a reasonable person may question the integrity of the
agency's programs and operations." 5 C.F.R. § 2635.502(d). According to
OGE, a proper recusal requires "that an employee avoid any official
involvement in a covered matter." OGE 99 x 8 at 2.

II. A.  **Use of Non-public Information 5 C.F.R. § 2635.703**

Section 703 of the Standards of Ethical Conduct, 5 C.F.R. § 2635.703,
states: "An employee shall not...allow the improper use of nonpublic
information to further his own private interest or that of another,
whether through advice or recommendation, or by knowing unauthorized
disclosure."

II. A.  **Use of Public Office for Private Gain 5 C.F.R. § 2635.702**

Section 702 of the Standards of Ethical Conduct, 5 C.F.R. § 2635.702,
states:

"An employee shall not use his public office...for the private gain of
friends, relatives, or persons with whom the employee is affiliated in a
nongovernmental capacity...."

According to commentary to Section 702, "issues relating to an
individual employee's use of public office for private gain tend to
arise when the employee's actions benefit those with whom the employee
has a relationship outside the office...". 57 Fed. Reg. 35030 (Aug. 7,
1992).

II. **Factual Findings**

    A.  **Background**

        1.  **Peter J. Kadzik**

Peter J. Kadzik was confirmed as the Assistant Attorney General (AAG)
for the Office of Legislative Affairs (OLA) on June 17, 2014, and served
in the position until January 19, 2017. As OLA AAG, Kadzik reported to
the Deputy Attorney General. Kadzik had re-joined the Department as a
Deputy Assistant Attorney General in OLA in 2013 after several decades
in private practice. Early in his legal career, Kadzik served as an
Assistant United States Attorney in the United States Attorney's Office
for the District of Columbia.

Kadzik is married to "LM." LM previously served as a political appointee
in former-President Bill Clinton's administration. "RS" is Kadzik's
child from a prior marriage, who was 24 years old at the time of these
events.^[^224^](#fn224){#fnref224 .footnote-ref}^

II. A.  1.  **John D. Podesta, Jr.**

John D. Podesta, Jr. is an attorney who served as chairman of the 2016
Clinton presidential campaign. During his career, Podesta also served in
various high-level positions in both the Bill Clinton and Barack Obama
administrations, including as White House Chief of Staff to Bill Clinton
and as Counselor to Obama.

Kadzik and Podesta have a long standing personal and professional
relationship which, during the Bill Clinton administration, included
Kadzik serving as Podesta's lawyer in 1998 during the Independent
Counsel investigation. Kadzik's relationship with Podesta was known at
the time of and raised during his confirmation for the OLA AAG position.

Kadzik told the OIG that neither he nor his wife had any business,
contractual, or financial relationship with Podesta or the Clinton
campaign while he served as OLA AAG. He said that he did not serve as an
officer, director, trustee, general partner, agent, attorney,
consultant, contractor, or employee of Podesta, Clinton, or the Clinton
campaign. Kadzik said that neither he nor Podesta had performed any
legal work for the other in the past five years.

II. A.  1.  **Office of Legislative Affairs**

The Office of Legislative Affairs (OLA) is responsible for managing the

Department's relationship with Congress and advancing its interests on
Capitol Hill.

Among its responsibilities, OLA prepares nominees for confirmation
hearings and Department witnesses for congressional hearings; responds
to congressional inquiries and oversight requests; advises and assists
Department leadership on a variety of congressional matters; and
advocates for the Department's legislative priorities. When answering
congressional inquiries and preparing nominees and employees for
hearings, OLA routinely coordinates with the relevant DOJ investigative,
litigation, and administrative components.

As OLA AAG, Kadzik reviewed and signed letters on behalf of the
Department responding to Congressional inquiries, prepared the highest
level nominees and witnesses for congressional testimony, and
represented OLA at the daily senior staff meetings. Senior staff
meetings were generally attended by the Attorney General (AG) and
members of her staff, the Deputy Attorney General (DAG) and her

Principal Assistant Deputy Attorney General (PADAG), as well as the
Directors of OLA and the Office of Public Affairs
(OPA).^[^225^](#fn225){#fnref225 .footnote-ref}^ At the senior staff
meeting, among other things, attendees discussed sensitive information
regarding Department cases and investigations and coordinated matters
and information that were expected to become public or to be the source
of public commentary and questions.

Kadzik told the OIG that his role was that of the Department's liaison
with Congress and that as such, he was "not involved" in Department
investigations. He stated that, "to the extent that I corresponded
with Congress, it was based on information provided to my office by the
relevant component within the

Department. So I didn\'t participate in any investigations."

Department cases and investigations are often the subject of
Congressional inquiries. As discussed below, OLA received numerous
congressional inquiries related to the Clinton matters.

4.  **Ethics Training and Obligations**

All Department employees are responsible for complying with Department
policies as well as the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of
the Executive Branch, codified in 5 C.F.R. Part 2635, which include
rules and regulations governing conflicts of interest, use of nonpublic
information, and misuse of position. The Department provides training
and resources to ensure all employees are aware of their ethical
responsibilities and are able to obtain ethics advice as specific
questions and situations arise. The ethics program includes annual
mandatory ethics training, and a Deputy Designated Agency Ethics
Official (DDAEO) in each Department component, among other things. A
designated DDAEO works within OLA.

Kadzik acknowledged participating in the Department's annual ethics
training. He also acknowledged that OLA employees are subject to the
same ethics rules and regulations as all other Departmental employees
even though OLA employees are not assigned to investigative or
litigation teams.

4.  **Kadzik's Recusals**

As a presidential appointee, Kadzik was required to enter an ethics
agreement indicating that he understood and would comply with the
conflict of interest laws and regulations and submit the financial
disclosure form required by the provisions of the Ethics in Government
Act of 1978.^[^226^](#fn226){#fnref226 .footnote-ref}^ After he was
confirmed, Kadzik also sent a 2014 recusal memorandum to various
Department components

(including OLA) listing the matters from which he was recused and
identifying the OLA DDAEO as the individual who would evaluate his need
to recuse himself (serve as his "gatekeeper") and the individuals who
would serve in his capacity as Acting

OLA AAG on those matters.^[^227^](#fn227){#fnref227 .footnote-ref}^

Kadzik's 2014 recusal memorandum stated that for matters from which he
had recused, all communications should be with the Acting OLA AAG and
"in no event should there be any discussions with Kadzik." Email
shows that after the initial 2014 memorandum, Kadzik emailed the OLA
DDAEO when he recused himself from additional matters involving clients
of his former law firm, clients of his wife's business, and personal
matters. Kadzik told the OIG that he likely orally informed the OLA
DDAEO, his deputies, and chief of staff when he was recused from
Clintonrelated matters on or about November 2, 2016, as discussed below.

**B. Events Preceding the "Heads Up" Email from Kadzik to Podesta (March
through May 2015)**

This section focuses on the events in the spring of 2015 leading up to
the "Heads up" email from Kadzik to Podesta, which included information
about the FOIA litigation and a congressional oversight hearing.

**1. OLA Clinton-Related Work**

On March 2, 2015, the New York Times reported that Clinton exclusively
used a personal email account to conduct government business while
serving as Secretary of State. The same day, the Department filed its
initial response (Answer) in a FOIA litigation seeking Clinton's email
and other documents during her tenure as Secretary of
State.^[^228^](#fn228){#fnref228 .footnote-ref}^

At the time, both Lynch and Yates were awaiting confirmation for the
positions of Attorney General and Deputy Attorney General,
respectively.^[^229^](#fn229){#fnref229 .footnote-ref}^ In order to
prepare Lynch and Yates to answer questions related to the former
Secretary of State's exclusive use of a personal email account (and the
applicable federal laws and regulations), Kadzik's principal deputy
drafted the briefing paper on the topic on March 18, 2015, and Kadzik
added edits on March 21, 2015, after the document was reviewed by
personnel in the Office of the Attorney General

(OAG), Office of the Deputy Attorney General (ODAG), and the
OPA.^[^230^](#fn230){#fnref230 .footnote-ref}^ The briefing paper
contained potential questions and the Department's vetted answers on the
topic as approved by personnel in OLA, the Civil Division, and the
Office of the Attorney General. Briefing papers are used to help prepare
nominees and employees to speak publicly on a Department issue or
concern.^[^231^](#fn231){#fnref231 .footnote-ref}^ Emails show that OLA
(in conjunction with other components) scheduled "moots" or preparatory
sessions with Lynch and Yates to prepare them to answer questions
related to the State Department emails, among other issues, in March,
April, and May 2015.

OLA also responded to congressional inquiries related to Clinton's use
of email during her tenure as Secretary of State. Emails show that
Kadzik coordinated with the Office of the Attorney General and the White
House with respect to nominee-Lynch's response to an April 2, 2015
congressional inquiry asking whether Lynch would commit to an
investigation into Clinton's use of an email server and appoint a
special counsel. Kadzik also replied on May 21, 2015, on behalf of the
Attorney General, to an April 22, 2015 Congressional inquiry into
whether Clinton was lobbied while Secretary of State by an unregistered
agent of a foreign power associated with the Clinton Foundation.

In addition to preparing nominees Lynch and Yates, OLA participated in
the preparation of the Director of the Office of Information Policy
(OIP) and the Chief of the Civil Division to answer questions related to
the State Department emails at their respective hearings. The OIP
Director testified on a panel addressing open government at a Senate
Judiciary Committee hearing on May 6, 2015.^[^232^](#fn232){#fnref232
.footnote-ref}^ After the hearing, the OLA employee who accompanied the
OIP Director emailed Kadzik that the majority of questions were directed
to the panelist from the State Department regarding Clinton's emails.

The Civil Division Chief testified on a panel on general oversight at a
House

Judiciary Committee hearing on May 19, 2015.^[^233^](#fn233){#fnref233
.footnote-ref}^ Although prepared to answer, the Civil Division Chief
was not asked questions related to the State Department emails at the
hearing. After the hearing, Kadzik sent an email complementing the
several DOJ division leaders who testified.

On May 18, the evening prior to the Civil Division Chief's testimony
before the House Judiciary Committee, the Department filed a proposed
schedule for the production of former Secretary of State Clinton's
emails as required by the court in the FOIA litigation. According to the
proposed schedule, the State Department emails would be released in
January 2016.

2. 2016 Clinton Campaign Staffed and Announced
----------------------------------------------

In early 2015, Clinton was preparing to announce her candidacy for

President. Prior to her announcement, in February 2015, Podesta left his
position in the White House as Counselor to the President to become
Chief of Staff for the Clinton campaign. In mid-March 2015, Brian Fallon
announced that he would be leaving his position as the Director of OPA
at the end of the month to become the Clinton campaign's national
spokesperson. Clinton formally announced her candidacy for President on
April 12, 2015.

Kadzik told the OIG that neither he nor his wife sought employment with
the campaign or discussed the prospect of employment with the campaign
with Podesta or other campaign members.

**3. Kadzik Assists Son's Job Search**

Also in early 2015, Kadzik's son "RS" was looking for employment
opportunities and sought a job with the Clinton campaign. Emails show
that Kadzik's wife forwarded Kadzik her edited version of RS's resume on
March 22, 2015, and that RS sent his resume to Kadzik and his wife for
their "final review" on April 1, 2015.

According to RS's resume, he lived in New York City and had worked for
Kadzik's wife's public affairs firm since December 2014 (approximately 3
months). Emails indicate that RS was paid for hourly work performed from
January to March 2015.

Kadzik told the OIG that he did not support his son financially other
than paying for his cell phone. He said that he did not declare his son
a dependent on his 2015 tax returns and provided a redacted copy of his
2015 return to the OIG.

On April 23, 2015, shortly after he left the Department and on the day
Lynch was confirmed as Attorney General, Fallon sent an email from his
Clinton campaign address to Kadzik's Department address that included a
single word on the subject line "Congrats!" Kadzik replied:

Thanks! Hope all is well with you, Fallon's wife, the kids, and the
candidate. Let me know if you or someone else needs a great assistant;
my 25 year old son is ready for Hillary Rodham Clinton.

One week later, on April 30, 2015, Fallon replied to Kadzik:

Can you send me his resume? Unfortunately I do not get an assistant but
Palmieri is hiring one and will be looking over resumes this weekend.

Within the hour, Kadzik emailed RS asking for his current resume and
then forwarded RS's resume to Fallon stating "Here you go. Again,
thanks. FYI,

Palmieri and my wife LM, went to college together."

Kadzik told the OIG that he did not recall sending Fallon the emails
requesting a job for his son. Kadzik also said that his son was neither
hired nor offered a job by the Clinton campaign and that he found
employment with a digital education company in New York City in August
2015.

4.  **Kadzik's Son Separately Seeks Employment with the Clinton
    Campaign**

According to an email released by Wikileaks, on May 5, 2015, one week
after Kadzik emailed Fallon his son's resume, RS emailed his resume
directly to Podesta.^[^234^](#fn234){#fnref234 .footnote-ref}^ In his
email to Podesta, RS said he was sending Podesta his resume at the
suggestion of Kadzik and his wife, LM. Podesta then forwarded RS's email
to at least two other campaign workers, one of whom was Palmieri, the
campaign's Director of Communications. Podesta's email stated "Do you
need any help in headquarters or states? Kadzik and LM's
son." Palmieri replied:

Heard from LM, too. Told her we did not have openings for rest of
quarter but can open back up in July.

Kadzik told the OIG that he did not recall when RS applied for a
position with the Clinton campaign, whether he and his wife suggested
that RS send his resume to Podesta, or whether he spoke to his wife
about any discussions with Palmieri on RS's behalf. Kadzik also said
that he did not know whether his wife or son ever followed up with
Podesta, Fallon, Palmieri, or anyone else associated with the campaign
for a job for RS, but that he (Kadzik) did not.

4.  **Kadzik Gives Podesta a "Heads Up"**

On May 19, 2015, Kadzik sent from his personal email account the "Heads
up" email to Podesta. There is no timestamp on the email. Kadzik wrote:

There is a House Judiciary Committee oversight hearing today where
the head of our Civil Division will testify. Likely to get questions on
State Department emails. Another filing in the FOIA case went in last
night or will file in this am that indicates it will be awhile (2016)
before the State Department posts the Clinton
emails.^[^235^](#fn235){#fnref235 .footnote-ref}^

Kadzik told the OIG that he did not recall, but does not deny sending
the "Heads up" email to Podesta and that he "apparently" sent the email
to Podesta to identify two important events of the day.

Kadzik told the OIG that no one in the Clinton campaign asked him for
information regarding the FOIA litigation and that he did not send the
email to try to help his son get a job with the campaign. Kadzik also
said he did not send any other "heads up" type emails or otherwise
communicate about Department matters to
Podesta.^[^236^](#fn236){#fnref236 .footnote-ref}^

Kadzik also said he did not speak with Podesta about Clinton after the
Department opened an investigation into the Clinton email server in July
2015. Kadzik told the OIG that he distinguished speaking to Podesta
about the FOIA litigation and the Clinton email investigation. "Whether
the email server investigation was criminal or a security review,
, it was now the Department doing something as a Department, rather
than the Department defending FOIA litigation, which was all public."

**C. Kadzik's Subsequent OLA Work Related to or Referencing Clinton**

In the time between spring 2015 and the day in November 2016 when Kadzik
was recused from Clinton-related matters, the FOIA litigation continued
and the FBI opened an investigation into Clinton's use of a private
email server and an investigation related to the Clinton Foundation.
These cases generated Clintonrelated inquiries from Congress to which
Kadzik responded both in testimony and in letters.

OLA continually responded to congressional inquiries and prepared
Department employees to respond to congressional inquiries related to
Clinton's email server and the Department's investigation. The inquiries
corresponded to various aspects of the Department's actions and
investigative choices including: requests to appoint a special counsel;
decisions to grant immunity; potential perjury charges; the Lynch/Bill
Clinton tarmac conversation; Comey's July 5, 2016 and Lynch's July 6,
2016 announcements regarding the email server investigation and
declination; congressional access to FBI investigative documents;
additional FOIA inquiries; and Comey's October 28 and November 6, 2016
letters to Congress

regarding the FBI review of additional Clinton related
emails.^[^237^](#fn237){#fnref237 .footnote-ref}^ OLA also coordinated
its hearing preparation and congressional responses with the appropriate
components which, with respect to the Clinton-related matters, included,
depending on the specific question, the OAG, ODAG, OPA, the Civil
Division, the National Security Division (NSD), and the FBI. Thus while
Kadzik had no role in the conduct of the underlying Clinton litigation
and investigation, he reported on and defended the Department's actions
with respect to its handling of a wide variety of Clinton-related
matters.

In addition, Kadzik, along with his FBI counterpart (the then Acting
Assistant Director of the FBI's Office of Congressional Affairs), and
representatives from the Department of State and Office of the Director
of National Intelligence were called to testify before Congress on
September 12, 2016, to address congressional access to and redactions of
FBI investigative material from the email server investigation.

The last letters that Kadzik signed before the 2016 election were sent
on

October 31, 2016, to several senators who had written to the Attorney
General and FBI Director after receiving the FBI Director's October 28,
2016 letter announcing the review of additional Clinton related emails.
Kadzik wrote, in part, "We assure you that the Department will continue
to work closely with the FBI and together dedicate all necessary
resources and take appropriate steps as expeditiously as possible."

Kadzik told the OIG that he had no role in the email server
investigation and that to his memory, in response to a congressional
inquiry, met with Department attorneys on the investigative team on only
one occasion to discuss the terms of the immunity agreements.

With respect to letters from Congress, Kadzik approved standardized
language which OLA used to respond with consistency. For example, when
asked about the Clinton email investigation, OLA consistently responded:
"Any investigation related to this referral will be conducted by law
enforcement professionals and career attorneys in accordance with
established Department policies and procedures which are designed to
ensure the integrity of all ongoing investigations" and when asked about
a special counsel OLA consistently responded by acknowledging the
authority and stating that the "authority is rarely exercised."

Axelrod also told the OIG that Kadzik had "no role" in the email server
investigation. Axelrod said that the investigative information
pertaining to that investigation was closely held, not discussed in
senior staff meetings, and not discussed with Kadzik. However, Axelrod
stated that Kadzik worked "on things related to the Clinton email
investigation." Axelrod also said that Kadzik likely had more access
to information regarding the FOIA litigation for the Clinton emails
since that was a civil matter in litigation and discussed in senior
staff meetings.

**D. Response to WikiLeaks Release**

The WikiLeaks release of Podesta/Kadzik emails on November 1 and 2,
2016, generated inquiries about Kadzik's conduct from several sources.

Axelrod told us that when WikiLeaks released the "Heads up" email, he
contacted Kadzik, who authenticated the email and, after searching his
emails, assured Axelrod that there were no other similar emails
(referencing Departmental matters) that could be released by WikiLeaks.

The Acting Director of OPA emailed Kadzik on November 2 stating that he
wanted to speak with Kadzik. The same day the OPA Acting Director
informed the press that Kadzik's "Heads up" email contained "public
information" that Kadzik sent "in his personal capacity" and was not
sent "during work hours." The OPA Acting Director told us that he made
the statements attributed to him in the press and said that while he did
not specifically recall the conversation with Kadzik, he did not dispute
that the information came from Kadzik.^[^238^](#fn238){#fnref238
.footnote-ref}^

The then Director of the DOJ Ethics Department told us that she
contacted the OLA DDAEO about the "Heads up" email and asked whether it
contained nonpublic Departmental information. She said the OLA DDAEO
assured her that the information in the email was public when Kadzik
sent the email. The then Ethics Director nevertheless expressed concern
to us that a Department leader had sent an email to a third party
without knowing whether the Department-related information in the email
had been made public.

Also following the disclosure, the Department's Office of Professional
Responsibility (OPR) initiated an inquiry into whether Kadzik had
disclosed privileged or confidential Department information to the
Clinton campaign. OPR submitted questions for Kadzik's written response
and, in December 2016, closed the inquiry after determining that the
Kadzik's "Heads up" email contained only public information and personal
opinion. Among other things, OPR found that on May 18, 2015, the
Department filed with the court the document containing the proposed
schedule for the release of the Clinton emails; the media reported the
schedule the same evening; and Kadzik sent his "Heads up" email to
Podesta on May 19, 2015, the following day. OPR concluded that Kadzik's
email did not include privileged or confidential information. OPR did
not consider Kadzik's conduct in terms of other ethical standards
including recusal.

**E. Kadzik Is Recused**

Axelrod told us that after Wikileaks posted the "Heads up" email, he
concluded that Kadzik should be recused from all Clinton-related
matters. He stated the email created an appearance problem because high
level DOJ employees should not be giving a "heads up" to a campaign and
that Kadzik had admitted he did not know whether the schedule in the
FOIA litigation had been publicly filed at the time he sent Podesta the
email. Axelrod stated that the recusal was not because of Kadzik's
personal relationship with Podesta but because Kadzik sent the "Heads
up" email. Axelrod said that "it was a feeling that, right, DOJ folks,
especially like senate confirmed senior leaders, but really anyone in
DOJ shouldn't be, you know, it wasn't good practice to be emailing sort
of people involved in sort of political campaigns to, right. It's not
our job to give campaigns a head's up. It's our job to do our work free
from politics."

Axelrod said that because Kadzik was a presidential appointee, Axelrod
probably discussed the matter with the Deputy Attorney General and
possibly the Attorney General and Associate Deputy Attorney General.
Axelrod said that in those discussions, "the decision was made was made
that Kadzik should.be screened off from.things Clinton
related."

Axelrod said that he told Kadzik that he needed to be recused on all
Clintonrelated matters and that Kadzik should recuse himself. Axelrod
said that Kadzik "understood" but was not "wild about" the need to
recuse himself. He said that Kadzik was not on the email server
investigative team or the FOIA litigation team but it was an appearance
issue and someone else needed to sign the Department's letters to
Congress.

Associate Deputy Attorney General (ADAG) Scott Schools told the OIG that
after the "Heads up" email was posted, Axelrod called him and they
agreed that Kadzik should be recused from Clinton-related matters
because of the appearance problem. In a subsequent telephone call,
Axelrod informed Schools that Kadzik did not agree with, but was willing
to abide by, the decision to recuse himself from the Clinton-related
matters. Axelrod also asked if Kadzik's recusal needed to be documented.
Schools said that there was no requirement to document the recusal and
told the OIG that while the decision to recuse was not difficult, the
rationale was nuanced and might be over scrutinized if the document was
subject to a FOIA request.

According to Schools, Kadzik's principal deputy in OLA later called him
to ask whether OLA should be informed of Kadzik's recusal. Schools told
her that she could inform OLA personnel about Kadzik's recusal but told
the OIG that he did not know if she had.^[^239^](#fn239){#fnref239
.footnote-ref}^

Kadzik told us Axelrod called him "on or about November 2, 2016" and
said that "in light of the controversy, I should recuse myself from
anything further concerning the Clinton emails." Kadzik said that since
he "had nothing to do with the Hillary Clinton email investigation or
FOIA litigation," the recusal only meant he would not review and
sign anymore letters to Congress about the matters.

Kadzik said that he would have informed his OLA deputies, OLA DDAEO, and
chief of staff of his recused status but did not recall the conversation
or who stood in his place as Acting OLA AAG for those matters. He said
it was likely that it was his principal deputy, as she was "the
oversight person."

Axelrod said that Kadzik's principal deputy took over his
responsibilities on Clinton-related matters -- that she took Kadzik's
place in the discussions related to the Clinton email investigation
during the week before the election and then generally handled the
Clinton related matters through the rest of Kadzik's term as OLA AAG,
which ended on January 19, 2017.

Kadzik told the OIG that he could not recall how Axelrod defined the
scope of his recusal but that, as a practical matter, Kadzik understood
that he would no longer sign letters to Congress on behalf of the
Department that were related to the

Clinton emails and that he was not aware that any letters came in after
November

2, 2016. Kadzik said that he "wasn\'t participating in anything with
respect to Hillary Clinton and the emails other than signing letters to
Congress." Kadzik also said that despite his recusal, he never had to
leave a meeting because the Clinton email server investigation was never
discussed. However, Axelrod and the OPA Acting Director told us that
Kadzik was replaced by his principal deputy for a time at senior staff
meetings after WikiLeaks released the "Heads up" email. Axelrod said
that the principal deputy replaced Kadzik because the discussions
involved Clinton-related matters.

Though Kadzik said he told his deputies and the OLA DDAEO that he was
recused, emails show that Kadzik subsequently sent and received emails
about Clinton-related matters.

Kadzik forwarded various congressional inquiries about Clinton-related
matters to ODAG, OAG, OAAG, OLA, and FBI personnel that had also been
sent to his principal deputy. When we asked why he did not leave the
matter for his principal deputy to handle, Kadzik said he forwarded the
emails to the persons who he thought could respond to the inquiries and
that action was no different than reminding his principal deputy that he
was recused.

We also asked Kadzik about two Clinton-related emails forwarded to him
by his principal deputy. Kadzik's principal deputy sent one email on
November 3, 2016, with the notation "FYSA" (for your situational
awareness) and another on November 6, 2016, with the notation "I've got
it. (Calls throughout today. All the right people looped.)" Kadzik said
he did not know why his principal deputy sent him emails after he was
recused, that he had not asked her to keep him informed of the matter
despite his recused status, and that he did not believe the "looped in"
email "broke the recusal." As noted previously, we were unable to
ask the principal deputy about these emails because she did not make
herself available for an interview.

There is evidence that on two other occasions, Kadzik may have spoken
with his principal deputy and DDAEO directly about Clinton-related
matters. On

November 4, 2016, Kadzik's principal deputy forwarded him an email from
a Senate

Judiciary staffer asking whether there would soon be an official update
on the Weiner laptop email review. Kadzik replied, "Call me later this
am." Kadzik told the OIG that he did not recall receiving the email,
responding to his principal deputy, or whether he ultimately spoke with
her. On November 28, 2018, when the OLA DDAEO asked Kadzik and his
principal deputy about the Mills immunity agreements with respect to a
FOIA request, Kadzik replied "Will circle back with both of you
tomorrow." Kadzik said he asked that they circle back to "find out what
she was asking about."

In contrast, emails also show that with respect to other (non-Clinton
related matters) on which Kadzik was recused, he reminded or informed
the persons on the email of his recused status.

**V. Analysis**

We analyze Kadzik's actions with respect to three regulations from the
Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch
(Standards of Ethical Conduct), 5 C.F.R. Part 2635: Personal and
business relationships, 5 C.F.R.

§ 2635.502 (Section 502); Use of non-public information, 5 C.F.R. §
2635.703 (Section 703); and Use of public office for private gain, 5
C.F.R. § 2635.702 (Section 702).

**A. Whether Kadzik Should Have Been Recused Prior to November 2 from
Clinton-Related Matters under Section 502 of the Standards of Ethical
Conduct**

Section 502 of the Standards of Ethical Conduct, 5 C.F.R. § 2635.502
establishes the analytical framework for determining when a federal
employee has an appearance of a conflict of interest that merits
recusal. As discussed above, Section 502 requires an employee to
consider the appearance of his participation in a particular matter
involving specific parties (1) that is likely to have a direct and
predictable effect on the financial interest of a household member, or
(2) if the employee has a covered relationship with someone who is a
party or represents a party to the matter. Section 502 also includes
catchall provision which may apply to "other circumstances" that would
lead a reasonable person to question an employee's impartiality in a
matter.

**1. Whether There Was a Particular Matter Involving Specific Parties**

The threshold issue for a Section 502(a) analysis is whether there is a
"particular matter involving specific parties" before the Department. A
"particular matter involving specific parties" denotes a specific
proceeding which affects the legal rights of the parties such as an
investigation or litigation. 5 C.F.R.

§ 2640.102(l).

During Kadzik's tenure as OLA AAG, the Department defended the

Department of State in a FOIA litigation filed in January 2015 seeking
emails from Clinton's personal server during her tenure as Secretary of
State, among other things. The Department also initiated the Clinton
email investigation in July 2015. Both the FOIA litigation and the email
server investigation are "particular matters involving specific
parties," as each is a discrete litigation or investigation. Clinton and
others were specific subjects of the Clinton email investigation, and
the FOIA litigation involved particular plaintiffs and
defendants.^[^240^](#fn240){#fnref240 .footnote-ref}^ Therefore, we
include both the FOIA litigation and the email server investigation in
our analysis (and for the ease of the reader refer to both as
"Clinton-related matters.")

**2. Whether Kadzik Should Have Recused Because of his Son's Efforts to
Obtain Employment with the Clinton Campaign**

We next considered whether Kadzik was required to recuse from the
Clintonrelated matters because of Kadzik and his son RS's efforts to
obtain employment for his son with the Clinton campaign.

Under the "financial interests" provisions of Section 502(a), recusal
would be required if the Clinton-related matters were likely to have a
direct and predictable effect on the financial interest of a member of
Kadzik's household. A direct and predictable effect requires a causal
link between a decision on the matter and the effect on the specified
financial interest and cannot be attenuated or dependent on the
occurrence of speculative events. 5 C.F.R. §§ 2635.502(b)(2),
2635.402(b)(1).

Kadzik told the OIG that his son lived in New York City and supported
himself financially. Kadzik also provided a redacted copy of his 2015
federal tax returns on which he did not declare his son as a dependent.

Even if the Clinton-related matters could affect his son's financial
interests, RS was not a member of Kadzik's household. Therefore, we
found that RS's efforts to obtain employment with the Clinton campaign
did not require Kadzik to recuse himself from Clinton-related matters
under the financial interest provision of Section 502(a).

Under the "covered relationship" provision of Section 502(a), recusal
would be required if Kadzik had a covered relationship with a party or
with someone who represents a party to a matter. Section 502 defines
"covered relationship" to include a "person for whom the
employee\'s...dependent child is, to the employee\'s
knowledge,...seeking to serve as an...contractor or employee." This is
the only category of "covered relationship" potentially applicable with
respect to Kadzik's son.^[^241^](#fn241){#fnref241 .footnote-ref}^ If RS
was a dependent child, Kadzik would have had a covered relationship with
a party to the particular matter since RS was seeking employment with
the Clinton campaign and Clinton was clearly a party to the Clinton
email investigation and may have been a party to the FOIA litigation. 5
C.F.R. § 2635.502(b)(1)(iii).

We did not find that RS was a "dependent child." In April 2015, Kadzik's
son was 24 years old.^[^242^](#fn242){#fnref242 .footnote-ref}^ Kadzik
said that his son was supporting himself financially while living in New
York City and that Kadzik only covered the cost of his son's cell phone.
Kadzik also told the OIG that he did not declare his son as a dependent
on his 2015 tax returns and provided a redacted copy of his 2015 return
to the OIG confirming this fact. Thus we found no evidence of a covered
relationship based on Kadzik and his non-dependent son's efforts to
obtain employment for his son with the Clinton
campaign.^[^243^](#fn243){#fnref243 .footnote-ref}^

The "other circumstances" provision in Section 502 applies when a
federal employee is concerned that "other circumstances" would cause a
reasonable person to question his impartiality. As with all Section 502
provisions, the conflict may be self-identified by the employee or
directed by management. OGE Memorandum 04 x 5.

Kadzik did not self-identify a potential appearance of a conflict under
the "other circumstances" provision based on his, his wife's, and his
son's efforts to get his son a job with the Clinton campaign. In April
and May 2015, Kadzik, his wife, and son reached out to personal
acquaintances in the Clinton campaign in an attempt to obtain a job for
his son RS with the campaign. At the same time, Kadzik was participating
in senior staff meetings where Clinton-related matters were discussed
and signing letters to Congress regarding Clinton-related matters on
behalf of the Department.

We believe that these circumstances would cause a reasonable person to
question Kadzik's impartiality in Clinton-related matters during the
time RS was seeking employment with the Clinton campaign. We therefore
concluded that under the "other circumstances" provision of Section
502(a)(2), Kadzik should have either recused himself from
Clinton-related matters beginning in April 2015, when he initiated
employment solicitations to the Clinton campaign, until RS was no longer
seeking employment with the campaign, or disclosed these circumstances
to the appropriate Department ethics officer so that the Department
could have considered whether Kadzik should be recused.

According to OGE, self-identification under the "other circumstances"
provision is permissive, but not required, and therefore the failure to
recuse under the provision is not an ethics violation. "Employees are
encouraged to use the process provided by the "other circumstances"
provision, but the 'election not to use that process cannot
appropriately be considered to be an ethical lapse.'" OGE letter 01 x 08
citing OGE letter 94 x 10(2); *see also* OGE 97 x 8, OGE 95 x 5; OGE 94
x 10. Instead, according to the former Departmental Ethics Director, the
failure to self-identify under the "other circumstances" is evidence of
an employee's judgment and may reflect on whether the employee has the
judgment necessary for a particular Department position.

Although Kadzik did not commit an ethics violation by failing to recuse
himself under Section 502(a)(2), we found that his failure to recognize
the appearance of a conflict by participating in Clinton-related matters
when he, his wife, and his son were trying to get his son a job with the
Clinton campaign demonstrated poor judgment.

**3. Whether Kadzik Should Have Recused from ClintonRelated Matters in
May 2015 by Reason of Sending the "Heads Up" Email to Podesta**

According to Kadzik, Axelrod told him he should recuse himself from
Clintonrelated matters "on or about" November 2, 2016, after learning
that Kadzik had sent the "Heads up" email to Podesta on May 19, 2015.
Axelrod told us that the "Heads up" email to Podesta raised appearance
concerns because Kadzik communicated with a partisan campaign about
Department matters and provided information without knowing whether it
had yet been made public.^[^244^](#fn244){#fnref244 .footnote-ref}^

As noted, Kadzik sent the "Heads up" email in May 2015. He continued to
participate in senior staff meetings, prepare Department employees for
hearings, and respond to inquiries about Clinton-related matters between
May 19 and November 2, when Axelrod instructed him to recuse himself. We
therefore analyzed whether Kadzik should have recused himself under
Section 502 in May 2015 rather than waiting for Axelrod to do it a year
and a half later.

We determined that the "Heads up" email did not require Kadzik to recuse
under the personal or financial interests provision of Section 502(a).
Neither sending the email nor any other aspect of Kadzik's relationship
with Podesta or the Clinton campaign gave Kadzik or a member of his
household a financial interest that would be affected by the outcome of
the Clinton-related investigations. We are not aware of any evidence
that Kadzik or any member of his household had any business,
contractual, or financial relationship of any kind with Podesta,
Clinton, or the Clinton campaign, or any other financial interest that
would be affected by any Clinton-related matters pending in the
Department of Justice.

Nor did the facts create a "covered relationship" within the definition
in Section 502(b)(1). For example, Kadzik did not serve as, or seek to
serve as, an officer, director, trustee, general partner, agent,
attorney, consultant, contractor, or employee of Podesta, Clinton, or
the Clinton campaign. See 5 C.F.R. § 2635.502(b)(1).

We therefore turned to the question of whether Kadzik's "Heads up" email
to the Clinton campaign was an "other circumstance" that would raise a
question about Kadzik's impartiality with respect to Clinton-related
matters within the meaning of Section 502(a)(2). As noted above,
according to OGE, selfidentification under the "other circumstances"
provision is permissive, but not required. Therefore, the failure to
recuse oneself under the provision may be bad judgment, but not an
ethics violation.

The "Heads up" email reflected an effort by Kadzik to be helpful to the
Clinton campaign. Kadzik sent government information (the proposed
schedule for the release of the Clinton emails in the FOIA litigation)
to a partisan campaign without knowing whether it had been made public.
Kadzik's May 2015 "Heads up" email explicitly stated that he did not
know whether the Department had yet filed the proposed schedule in
court. Similarly, according to Axelrod, Kadzik admitted in November 2016
that he did not know whether the information had been released
publically when he sent the email to Podesta. Because Kadzik admittedly
did not know that the information had been released publically when he
sent the "Heads up" email to Podesta, Department leadership decided that
Kadzik should be recused from Clinton-related matters. As discussed
below, Kadzik actually used information he acquired in his official
position with the intention to assist the campaign in a manner that
would have been a misuse of office but for a fact that Kadzik did not
definitely know --- that the proposed schedule had already been made
public.^[^245^](#fn245){#fnref245 .footnote-ref}^ Kadzik's willingness
to do that raised a reasonable question about whether he would be
willing or inclined to act partially toward the Clinton campaign in
connection with his official duties, which sometimes touched on
Clinton-related matters. At minimum, this created an appearance problem
with respect to Kadzik's

ability to act impartially that justified Axelrod in recusing him from
further participation in Clinton-related matters.

We believe that Kadzik used poor judgment not only in sending the email
to a partisan campaign without knowing whether its content was public,
but also in failing to recognize how his action would impact the
Department and in failing thereafter to recuse himself from
Clinton-related matters pursuant to Section 502(a)(2).

**B. Whether Kadzik Violated the Terms of his Recusal after November 2,
2016**

In this section, we discuss whether Kadzik violated the terms of his
recusal after Axelrod instructed him to recuse from Clinton-related
matters on or about November 2, 2016.

Shortly after his confirmation, Kadzik signed an ethics agreement with
JMD (for OGE's approval) which identified the scope of his recusals and
sent a 2014 memorandum to various leadership components and OLA
identifying the specific matters from which he would be recused.
Kadzik's memorandum stated that no one should communicate with him about
the matters from which he was recused. Furthermore, Kadzik demonstrated
his knowledge that a recusal included communications when he received
emails related to other recused matters and replied notifying the sender
that he was recused.

Communicating about a matter is considered participation and employees
should not communicate with others about matters from which they have
been recused.^[^246^](#fn246){#fnref246 .footnote-ref}^ Occasionally, a
recused employee may receive communications about the matter in an
email, telephone call, or meeting. On those occasions, recused employees
are trained to clearly identify their recusal to the sender of the
email, the caller, or meeting attendees (as the employee leaves the
meeting room or the discussion is tabled). While an inadvertent
communication would not be considered

"participation" in violation of the recusal, repeated and unaddressed
communications may evidence a violation of the recusal or a lack of
respect for both the process and the Department that would represent
poor judgment.

We found that Kadzik forwarded several emails communicating information
related to Clinton-related matters within the Department after his
recusal and indicated his intent to speak with staff about those
matters. In each of those instances his principal deputy also was copied
on the incoming email and aware of Kadzik's recusal. In none of those
instances did Kadzik either respond to the incoming email informing the
sender that he was recused from Clinton-related matters or advise the
recipients of his forwarded emails that he was recused from
Clinton-related matters. By contrast, when Kadzik received emails
related to other matters from which he was recused, he appropriately
responded to the senders alerting them to or reminding them of his
recusal.

We therefore found that Kadzik understood his responsibilities when
contacted about matters from which he was recused, and that he exercised
poor judgment when he failed to fully respect his post-November 2
recusal. Kadzik argued that his post-recusal participation was not
substantial. However, even if this was a mitigating factor, we could not
substantiate his assertion because Kadzik told us he was unable to
recall details of his activities during this time. In addition, as noted
previously, his principal deputy and his ethics advisor (OLA DDAEO),
neither of whom still work for the Department, did not make themselves
available to speak with us.

Ultimately, once Department leadership made the decision that Kadzik
should be recused from Clinton-related matters, Kadzik was required to
cease all participation.

**C. Whether Kadzik Improperly Used Non-Public information in Violation
of the Standards of Ethical Conduct**

We next consider whether Kadzik violated Section 703 of the Standards of
Ethical Conduct, 5 C.F.R. § 2635.703, which states: "An employee shall
not...allow the improper use of nonpublic information to further his own
private interest or that

of another, whether through advice or recommendation, or by knowing
unauthorized disclosure."

In December 2016, OPR conducted an inquiry to consider whether Kadzik
disclosed privileged or confidential Department information to the
Clinton campaign and determined that Kadzik's "Heads up" email contained
public information and personal opinion. Among other things, OPR found
that on May 18, 2015, the Department filed with the court the document
containing the proposed schedule for the release of the Clinton emails;
the media reported the schedule the same evening; and Kadzik sent his
"Heads up" email to Podesta on May 19, 2015, the following day. OPR
concluded that Kadzik's email did not include privileged or confidential
information.

Although OPR did not specifically address Kadzik's compliance with
Section 703, the fact that the information in Kadzik's "Heads up" email
did not include nonpublic information also requires the finding that
Kadzik did not violate Section 703.

**D. Whether Kadzik Misused His Public Office for Private Gain in
Violation of the Standards of Ethical Conduct**

We next consider whether Kadzik violated Section 702 of the Standards of
Ethical Conduct, 5 C.F.R. § 2635.702, which states: "An employee shall
not use his public office...for the private gain of friends, relatives,
or persons with whom the employee is affiliated in a nongovernmental
capacity...". According to commentary to Section 702, "issues
relating to an individual employee's use of public office for private
gain tend to arise when the employee's actions benefit those with whom
the employee has a relationship outside the office...". 57 Fed. Reg.
35030 (Aug. 7, 1992).

We found that Kadzik learned of the proposed schedule for the release of
the Clinton server emails in his capacity as a Department employee. We
also found that Kadzik sent the information to a longtime personal
friend and professional colleague, Podesta, with whom Kadzik had a
relationship outside the office. Further, we found that Kadzik believed
that the information would be of benefit to the Clinton
campaign.^[^247^](#fn247){#fnref247 .footnote-ref}^ However, as
discussed above, the information included in the "Heads up" email was
public at the time that Kadzik sent it. Therefore we did not find that
these facts amounted to a violation of Section 702.

**PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY**

BLANK
=====

**CHAPTER FIFTEEN: FBI RECORDS VAULT TWITTER ANNOUNCEMENTS**

**I. Introduction**

On November 1, 2016, in response to multiple Freedom of Information Act
(FOIA) requests, the FBI Records Management Division's
Records/Information Dissemination Section (RIDS) posted records to the
FBI Records Vault, a page on the FBI's public website, concerning the
"William J. Clinton Foundation" (Clinton Foundation). The bulk of those
records concerned the 2001 investigation into the pardon of Marc Rich.
The \@FBIRecordsVault Twitter account announced this posting later that
same day.^[^248^](#fn248){#fnref248 .footnote-ref}^ This Twitter
announcement or "tweet" followed a series of 20 tweets released from the
\@FBIRecordsVault account on October 30, 2016, after a year-long dormant
period during which no tweets announcing FOIA releases on the FBI
Records Vault had been issued. One of the 20 tweets on October 30, 2016,
concerned a release of records for Fred C. Trump, the father of then
candidate Donald Trump.

Several newspaper reports suggested that the timing of the Clinton
Foundation tweet---coming four days after FBI Director James Comey had
announced the re-opening of the Hillary Clinton email
investigation---was "further evidence of FBI meddling" in the 2016
election.

The FBI Inspection Division (INSD) conducted a review of the
circumstances leading to the Clinton Foundation tweet that focused
particularly on the causes of the one-year dormant period and the
circumstances surrounding the release of 20 tweets on October 30, 2016,
which as noted above included the Fred C. Trump information. INSD's
investigation found that: (1) the materials responsive to the FOIA
requests were "properly posted" to the FBI Records Vault and (2) a
technical malfunction that began in October 2015 and went unnoticed
caused the \@FBIRecordsVault Twitter account to cease posting automatic
Twitter announcements about records posting to the Vault. The
malfunction was corrected with a software update on October 30, 2016.
After this correction, INSD found that the tweet function operated
properly---automatically posting overdue tweets on the \@FBIRecordsVault
Twitter feed for FOIA releases posted during the dormant period on the
FOIA Vault page---and then functioning as intended from that point
forward, to include the November 1, 2016 tweet concerning the Clinton
Foundation. Therefore, INSD concluded that the tweet concerning the
Clinton Foundation was not affected by the software malfunction that
prevented the issuance of other tweets for the one-year period.

The OIG conducted this follow-up review focused in particular on the
circumstances surrounding the November 1, 2016 FOIA posting on the FBI
Records Vault and the subsequent tweet announcing the posting. The
purpose of this review was to determine whether there was any evidence
that improper political considerations were a factor in the timing of
these events. As part of this investigation, the OIG reviewed FOIA
requests received by the FBI on the Clinton Foundation prior to November
1, 2016, documents associated with the FBI's processing of these
requests, and email records for individuals involved in processing and
releasing the requests. The OIG interviewed eight individuals from RIDS
and the FBI's Office of Public Affairs (OPA).

Based on our investigation, we found no evidence to indicate that
improper political considerations influenced the FBI's processing and
release of the Clinton

Foundation documents or the use of an FBI Twitter account to publicize
the release. The evidence indicates that the FOIA requests related to
the Clinton Foundation were processed according to RIDS' internal
procedures like other similarly-sized requests. Likewise, we found no
evidence to indicate that the FOIA response was either expedited or
delayed in order to impact the 2016 Presidential election. Below are the
factual findings and conclusions reached by the OIG's investigation.

**II. Background**

This section discusses the laws, regulations, guidance, and procedures
governing the FBI's activities in receiving, researching, processing,
and responding to FOIA requests and, in appropriate cases, publicly
releasing documents produced in response to FOIA requests by posting
such documents on the FBI Records Vault.

**A. Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552**

The *Freedom of Information Act*, 5 U.S.C. § 552 (FOIA), requires
federal agencies to make agency records available to the public and sets
forth the specific requirements to do so along with guidance on records
and information exempt from public release. On June 30, 2016, the *FOIA
Improvement Act of 2016* (the FOIA Improvement Act), Public Law No.
114-185, 130 Stat. 538, updated 5 U.S.C. § 552 with a notable change
pertinent to this case regarding when an agency must release
previously-requested records to the public. Before the FOIA Improvement
Act, FOIA permitted agencies to proactively release records, "which,
because of the nature of their subject matter, the agency determines
have become or are likely to become the subject of subsequent requests
for substantially the same records."^271^ This wording, often referred
to as the "frequently requested record" provision of FOIA, allowed
agencies latitude to decide when to make these records available and for
how long.^272^ However, the FOIA Improvement Act now also requires
agencies to publicly release records once they have received three or
more requests for the same or substantially similar records. This is
commonly referred to as the "rule of

271. 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(2)(D) (2009).
272. 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(2)(D) (2009).

three."^273^ An agency may also pre-emptively release the records if it
believes they will receive additional requests for the records.^274^

Under FOIA, agencies are authorized to withhold information from public
release that is specifically exempt from release under 5 U.S.C. §
552(b), traditionally referred to as FOIA exemptions. Exemptions cover
material such as classified information, trade secrets, personnel and
medical files, and law enforcement information.^275^ Under this
provision however, the agency is tasked with redacting the information
that cannot be disclosed, but releasing as much of the requested
information as possible.^276^

In sensitive law enforcement matters, FOIA allows a law enforcement
agency to "treat the records as not subject to the requirements of
FOIA."^277^ This is known as a FOIA exclusion, which "provides
protection in three limited sets of circumstances where publicly
acknowledging even the existence of the records could cause harm to law
enforcement or national security interests."^278^ The first exclusion
protects records in an ongoing criminal investigation, the release of
which could "reasonably be expected to interfere with enforcement
proceedings."^279^ The second exclusion protects from the acknowledgment
of confidential informant records.^280^ The last exclusion protects the
FBI's classified foreign intelligence, counterintelligence, and
international terrorism records.^281^ The Department's Office of
Information Policy (OIP) requires Department components---including the
FBI---to obtain OIP's approval to use a FOIA exclusion.^282^

FOIA allows agencies to expedite the processing of records in cases
where the requester can "demonstrate a compelling need" or in other
situations as defined by each agency.^283^ A "compelling need" is
defined in FOIA as a situation where not receiving the requested records
quickly "could reasonably be expected to pose an imminent threat to the
life or physical safety of an individual" or in situations where
individuals who disseminate information demonstrate an "urgency

273. 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(2)(D)(ii) (2016).
274. 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(2)(D)(ii).
275. 5 U.S.C. § 552(b).
276. 5 U.S.C. § 552(b).
277. 5 U.S.C. § 552(c)(1).
278. Department of Justice, Office of Information Policy, Implementing
    FOIA's Statutory Exclusion Provisions, Aug. 15, 2014,
    https://www.justice.gov/oip/blog/foia-guidance-6.
279. 5 U.S.C. § 552(c)(1)(B)(ii).
280. 5 U.S.C. § 552(c)(2).
281. 5 U.S.C. § 552(c)(3).
282. 36 C.F.R. § 16.6(g)(1) (2017).
283. 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(6)(E)(i).

to inform the public concerning actual or alleged Federal Government
activity."^284^ If the agency grants the request, it must process the
FOIA request "as soon as practicable."^285^

**B. The FBI FOIA Process**

RIDS oversees the FBI's FOIA program. This section describes the RIDS
FOIA process, their coordination with other FBI entities on "high
visibility" and "rule of three" requests, and the posting of FOIA
requests on the FOIA Vault.

**1. Records/Information Dissemination Section's FOIA Process**

FBI Policy Directive 0481D, Freedom of Information Act and Privacy Act
Requests, February 8, 2012, establishes the FBI's FOIA and Privacy Act
programs and provides top-level guidance. It sets forth that the FBI's
policy is to respond to FOIA and Privacy Act requests within 20 business
days (the requirement set forth in the FOIA) and establishes an
over-arching list of responsibilities for various offices within the FBI
to assist RIDS to meet that goal. Policy Directive 0481D provides no
additional procedural guidance beyond this top-level listing of roles
and responsibilities. With the exception of Policy Directive 0481D, RIDS
does not have any formal rules or manuals that outline the FBI's FOIA
process.^286^

FOIA requests received by the FBI are initially reviewed during a weekly
meeting by senior RIDS personnel, including the section chief, assistant
section chief, and unit chiefs. During that meeting, "high visibility"
and complex requests are identified, as well as those that may qualify
for expedited treatment (if requested). RIDS personnel told us that high
visibility requests are generally those dealing with current political
issues; anything dealing with a significant issue or person of interest
to the public and the FBI; or items that have potential to impact the
FBI. According to RIDS personnel, the RIDS Section Chief and Assistant
Section Chief normally determine which requests will be designated high
visibility requests. As detailed below, responses to high visibility
requests receive a higher level of supervisory review at the end of the
process, and are also made available to the public on the FBI Records
Vault.

Following intake, a FOIA request is then submitted to the Work Process
Unit (WPU) in RIDS for initial processing. FOIA analysts send the
requestor an acknowledgement of the request and provide them a FOIA
number. They then search the FBI's central records system, including
Sentinel and the Automated Case Support (ACS) system, and contact
relevant FBI personnel to locate responsive

284. 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(6)(E)(v). The Department's FOIA Regulations add
    two more categories in which the Department may grant expedited
    processing: the loss of substantial due process rights or matters of
    widespread and exceptional media interest in which there exist
    possible questions about the government's integrity that affects
    public confidence. 28 C.F.R. § 16.5(e)(1)(i)-(iv).
285. 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(6)(E)(iii).
286. As a result, the following description of the FBI's process is
    based on interviews with RIDS managers and analysts.

records. If no records are found, the FBI communicates this fact to the
requestor. If responsive records are identified, they are compiled,
quality checked, and then uploaded into the FOIA Document Processing
System.

Once the collection of documents has been completed, the response is
placed in a workflow "queue" to await processing by a RIDS disclosure
analyst in one of the RIDS processing units. The FBI has established
four separate workflow "queues" based on the volume of responsive
documents. Responses that qualify for expedited treatment under FOIA are
moved to the front of the appropriate workload queue. All other
responses enter the queue from the back, in a "First In, First Out"
order.

According to the RIDS Section Chief, requests with 50 or fewer pages of
responsive documents enter the "small" queue and are typically processed
within approximately 4 months from the date of the request to the date
of the response.^[^249^](#fn249){#fnref249 .footnote-ref}^

Requests generating between 50 and 950 pages of responsive documents are
directed to the "medium" queue and are typically completed in
approximately 9 to 10 months. Completion time for requests placed in the
"large" queue, those that generate 950 to 8,000 pages of relevant
documents, is approximately 2 and a half years. The fourth queue, for
extra-large requests that generate over 8,000 pages of responsive
documents, can take upwards of 4 years to fulfill. For larger requests,
requestors do not have to wait the full time period for documents; RIDS
provides interim releases in batches of 500 pages at a time.

RIDS personnel explained that once a request has worked its way to the
front of the appropriate workflow queue, a supervisor assigns the
responsive documents to a disclosure analyst for processing. Processing
the documents involves a line-by-line review of the documents to
identify and redact information exempt from release under the FOIA.
After the disclosure analyst's review is complete, RIDS experts and
supervisors conduct a quality review. If the request is not a high
visibility request, the analyst finalizes the release, sends the
appropriate correspondence to the requestor, and closes the matter.

Responses to high visibility requests are subject to additional
management review before being released to the requestor or posted to
the FBI Vault, including by the RIDS Section Chief and the FOIA attorney
supporting RIDS, to ensure accurate and proper application of
exemptions, classification decisions, and redactions and to spot any
other potential issues. The processing analyst drafts a "high
visibility" memorandum to accompany the package through these additional
reviews. According to the RIDS Section Chief, the designation of a
request as "high visibility" does not mean it will be processed quicker
than any other request, unless it otherwise qualifies for expedited
treatment. Rather, these requests are processed according to the same
prioritization procedures as other FOIA requests.

2. Release of FOIA Documents on the FBI Vault
---------------------------------------------

The FBI Records Vault is a page on the FBI.gov public website. Requests
posted to the FBI Records Vault fall into one or both of the following
categories: high visibility requests or requests that meet the "rule of
three" standard as defined in the 2016 updates to FOIA.

Although OPA manages the overall FBI.gov public website, RIDS is
responsible for the content and postings for the FBI Records Vault page.
According to RIDS personnel, in the fall of 2016, once RIDS management
determined that a post would be made to the FBI Records Vault, RIDS
would notify the RMD chain of command, OPA's National Press Office, and
often the General Counsel's FOIA Litigation Unit Chief of the upcoming
post. To assist historians and researchers who use the FBI Records
Vault, RIDS would often ask the FBI Historian to draft a summary of the
documents to accompany the posting on the FBI Records Vault. The purpose
of RIDS's notification to the National Press Office was to allow the
National Press Office an opportunity to prepare for any media inquiries
and to notify OPA management and FBI executive management as necessary.

Ultimately, once all these offices had been notified of the upcoming
post, and a summary had been drafted to be posted with the responsive
documents, the RIDS Section Chief made the final determination of when
to post the documents.^[^250^](#fn250){#fnref250 .footnote-ref}^
Postings could be delayed by the Section Chief and Assistant Section
Chief of RIDS, as well as the Office of Public Affairs and FBI executive
management. The RMD Section Chief told us that postings could only be
delayed for short periods of time to give FBI executive management
notice that information with high public interest was about to be
posted. Once the release was posted to the FBI Records Vault, the
\@FBIRecordsVault Twitter account was configured to automatically
announce (autotweet) the addition of new content to the FBI Records
Vault.

**III. Findings**

This section presents our findings with regard to the timeline of events
and our analysis of whether there were any improper political
considerations involved with the timing of the FOIA release and its
associated tweet.

**A. Facts**

**1. Timeline**

Nov 10, 2015 FBI Records Management Division (RMD) receives the first
FOIA request for documents relating to the Clinton Foundation. Several
subsequent requests for the same or similar materials are later combined
with the initial request for processing.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Dec 17, 2015                      | Records/Information Dissemination |
|                                   | Section (RIDS) analysts begin     |
|                                   | searching for responsive          |
|                                   | documents.                        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| May 12, 2016                      | RIDS analysts complete the search |
|                                   | for responsive documents. The     |
|                                   | resulting collection (the         |
|                                   | "Clinton Foundation documents")   |
|                                   | is placed in the "medium workflow |
|                                   | queue" to await processing for    |
|                                   | release on a "First In, First     |
|                                   | Out" basis.                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Aug 15, 2016                      | RIDS begins reviewing the Clinton |
|                                   | Foundation documents for exempt   |
|                                   | and classified material.          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Oct 25, 2016                      | RIDS completes its review and     |
|                                   | redaction of the documents.       |
|                                   | Because RIDS had designated this  |
|                                   | release as a "high visibility"    |
|                                   | response, it receives review by   |
|                                   | the RIDS Assistant Section Chief  |
|                                   | and the FBI Office of Public      |
|                                   | Affairs (OPA) prior to release to |
|                                   | the requesters and to the FBI     |
|                                   | Records Vault. The FBI Historian  |
|                                   | is asked to draft a summary of    |
|                                   | the documents' contents to        |
|                                   | accompany the release to the      |
|                                   | Vault.                            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Oct 28, 2016                      | OPA informs RIDS that it concurs  |
|                                   | with the proposed release of the  |
|                                   | Clinton Foundation documents.     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Oct 31, 2016                      | OPA requests RIDS to postpone     |
|                                   | posting the Clinton Foundation    |
|                                   | documents for one day because of  |
|                                   | workload resulting from Director  |
|                                   | Comey's October 28 letter to      |
|                                   | Congress announcing reactivation  |
|                                   | of the Clinton email              |
|                                   | investigation.                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Nov 1, 2016                       | RIDS publishes the Clinton        |
|                                   | Foundation documents on the FBI   |
|                                   | Records Vault. The posting is     |
|                                   | announced on a systemgenerated    |
|                                   | tweet from \@FBIRecordsVault.     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| > **2.**                          | **Detailed Chronology**           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

The first Clinton Foundation request received by RMD on November 10,
2015, sought any and all records about the Clinton Foundation. Between
November 11 and December 15, 2015, the request was pending assignment
for initial processing. The Work Processing Unit opened a request for
the Clinton Foundation on December 15. Materials from six subsequent,
similar requests were later combined with this
request.^[^251^](#fn251){#fnref251 .footnote-ref}^ These multiple
requests met the "rule of three" standard for posting on the FBI's FOIA
Vault page. The Clinton Foundation request was designated as a high
visibility request during processing due to its subject and the
expectation it could attract media attention. The request was not
designated for "expedited" treatment.

Between December 17, 2015, and May 12, 2016, RIDS analysts searched for
and gathered material responsive to the request. During this initial
phase, RIDS identified additional documents that were responsive to the
FOIA request but potentially qualified for a FOIA exclusion. The RIDS
Section Chief stated to the OIG that when they located these documents,
he coordinated with the relevant investigative section chief and
determined the FBI should seek Department approval to use a FOIA
exclusion. The RIDS Section Chief explained to the OIG that the
Department's policies required the FBI to "write up an exclusion" for
approval by OIP. The Director of OIP ultimately approved the FBI's use
of an exclusion for these documents on July 25, 2016.

Responsive materials also included documents involving a closed 2001 FBI
investigation probing whether donations to the Clinton Foundation had
been made to influence former President Clinton to pardon Marc Rich.
After discovering the Marc Rich records on May 9, 2016, the RIDS Section
Chief released the records to the medium processing queue.

In the three months between May 12 and August 15, 2016, the documents
collected in response to the request (the "Clinton Foundation
documents") were in the medium workflow queue awaiting processing.
During this timeframe, additional relevant records were located and
added to the documents already in the queue, but the request remained in
the medium queue.

On August 16, 2016, the Clinton Foundation request entered the
processing and review phase in which the analyst reviewed the pages for
exempted material and performed a declassification review, and the
supervisor performed a quality review. Because the Clinton Foundation
request had been designated as a high visibility request, it received
additional review by the FOIA Unit Chief, the RIDS Assistant Section
Chief and the RIDS Section Chief.

On October 25, 2016, the RIDS Assistant Section Chief notified two
individuals in OPA's National Press Office---the Unit Chief and a Public
Affairs Specialist---and the FBI Historian via email that documents
responsive to the Clinton Foundation request, a high visibility FOIA
release, were ready for their review prior to release. The Assistant
Section Chief noted in his email that RIDS planned to post the FOIA
response to the FBI Records Vault on October 28 or 31, 2016. The
Assistant Section Chief noted in his email that "the timing, of course,
may draw attention" to this release and provided a copy of the high
visibility memo drafted by the FOIA review unit, which provided a brief
overview of the substance of the release. The Assistant Section Chief
told us and the recipients stated that they understood this statement to
refer to the short time before the 2016 election and thus the expected
media interest in any release involving the Clintons. In the email the
Assistant Section Chief also requested that the FBI Historian write a
synopsis for the FBI Records Vault posting.

On October 26, the National Press Office Unit Chief sent an email to the
Public Affairs Specialist in her office and the FBI Historian stating,
"Can you give this reviewing the Clinton Foundation documents
priority in the event we need to consider timing?" According to the Unit
Chief, her timing concern involved the election being close and with the
potential media coverage, needing to allot time to review documents to
be prepared for any issues that might arise after the documents were
released. The Unit Chief told us that the press office wanted to review
the documents in order to determine whether to alert FBI executive
management, potentially including the FBI Director, to the potential
media coverage. She stated that her reference to the timing was not to
make it a high priority to ensure that it was released prior to the
election, but that it meant "that they needed to stop what they're
doing and review this so that we can make a decision if we need to, or
raise it to another level."

On October 27, the Public Affairs Specialist provided the high
visibility memorandum and about 15 pages of the FOIA release documents
to the Assistant Director (AD) of OPA, Michael Kortan, for his review.
The FBI Historian told us that in response to the request from RIDS and
the National Press Office Unit Chief, he drafted a synopsis to accompany
the release of records and sent it to the National Press Office Unit
Chief on October 27, 2016. That same day, the FBI Historian also emailed
the Assistant Section Chief with a short summary of the release to
accompany the FBI Records Vault posting, and cautioned the Assistant
Section Chief not to make the post "live" before checking back with the
Public Affairs Specialist on whether OPA was ready for the release.

On Friday, October 28, the Public Affairs Specialist emailed RIDS to say
that OPA reviewed the FOIA response, and had no issues with the proposed
release.

On Monday, October 31, the Public Affairs Specialist sent an inquiry to
RIDS at 9:17 a.m. asking whether the responsive materials had been
released to the requester yet. When the RIDS Assistant Section Chief
responded that they were in the process of posting it to the FBI Records
Vault, the Public Affairs Specialist requested an hour delay to give AD
Kortan an additional heads-up. As a result, RIDS planned for an 11:30
a.m. release and informed OPA. The Public Affairs Specialist then called
the RIDS Section Chief and requested to delay the posting for a full
day. The RIDS Section Chief stated that the Public Affairs Specialist
told him they needed the delay because they were overwhelmed by the
reaction to Director Comey's announcement regarding the Clinton email
investigation and "that there's not any way the National Press
Office can deal with this today." However, the Public Affairs
Specialist told us she could not recall the reason for the delay. The
National Press Office Unit Chief stated that this was a typical delay
needed to ensure that AD Kortan had the time to review the documents and
make notifications to executive management. The RIDS Section Chief
agreed to delay the posting until the next day.

On the morning of November 1, the RIDS Section Chief sent an email to
members of his team as well as individuals in OPA stating that RIDS was
ready to make the Clinton Foundation documents public on the FBI Vault
site. In the absence of further delay requests or other inputs from OPA,
the RIDS Section Chief approved the public posting of the materials and
instructed one of his subordinates, a Supervisory Government Information
Specialist (SGIS), to publish it on the FBI

Records Vault. The SGIS then posted the FOIA
records.^[^252^](#fn252){#fnref252 .footnote-ref}^

Witnesses told us that the fact that the presidential election was just
a week ahead was not a factor in deciding when to release the Clinton
Foundation documents to the public, though they knew the timing would
call attention to their release. They stated that the FBI does not take
into account elections in deciding how to process FOIA requests or when
to release responsive documents to the public. Witnesses told us that
there was no FOIA equivalent to the Election Year Sensitivities guidance
that addresses overt investigative steps and the timing of charges.
Further, they told us that there were no discussions about delaying the
release of the Clinton Foundation documents until after the election and
that the fact that the release occurred the week before the election was
a coincidence.

In response to OIG inquiries regarding the processing and the timing of
the release, the RIDS Assistant Section Chief emphasized that FOIA is a
release statute and presumes release: "The legal duty under the FOIA
is to release something.when it's ready to be
released.irrespective of any timing, irrespective of any
election. The FOIA statute says when something is ready to be
released, we release it." He also stated, "We deal with the most
sensitive issues.every day.. You have to stick to the
process." The RIDS Section Chief told us that the only guidance they
received regarding the timing of FOIA releases came "from the Director
himself when he released a summary of Hillary Rodham Clinton's July 2,
2016 interview with the FBI."^[^253^](#fn253){#fnref253
.footnote-ref}^ The FBI had received criticism for releasing the
documents on a Friday to minimize press attention. The Section Chief
told us that, in a message to the FBI, he understood Comey to say that
the FBI does not "hold onto anything for political purposes" and "when
it's ready it goes out." The attorney supporting RIDS stated that in her
interactions with RIDS management, "they have always been very clear
that the FOIA process operates rather independently of any politics with
a small p or the big P for that matter, that may be going on." She
added:

The way that RIDS works, it's such a massive beast that it's
essentially a machine.. And it could be the dogcatcher case next to
the Hillary Clinton case, and you're going to handle them the same. The
next one in your queue pops up, you're going to work it until it's done,
and then you're going to move onto your next one. So, the FOIA
process.does not sort of cherry pick the things that we want to
handle at any particular time in any particular way, either fast or
slow.

Later on November 1, a system-generated tweet from \@FBIRecordsVault
announced the posting on FBI's Records Vault. Shortly thereafter, NPO
began receiving inquiries from the media questioning the timing of the
posting of the records and the associated tweet. The SGIS stated that he
received multiple inquiries about the tweet because individuals within
OPA and RMD were concerned that he had manually tweeted the release. The
SGIS told us he informed the individuals who called that he had not
manually tweeted concerning the release. He then checked the Twitter
feed on his phone and realized the attention it was getting, so he
looked into what happened. The SGIS stated he then learned about the
issues with the automatic Twitter feed, that those issues had been
corrected on October 30, and that upon correction the system released
multiple tweets concerning posts over the prior year.

**B. Analysis**

In order to determine whether the Clinton Foundation release was
impacted by any improper political motivation, we examined two issues.
First, we explored whether the Clinton Foundation request was handled
differently than other similarly-sized, high visibility FOIA requests.
Next, we also examined whether any FBI officials improperly attempted to
affect the timing of the processing or release of the responsive
documents to either advance or harm the prospects of either presidential
candidate.

We found no evidence that the Clinton Foundation request was handled any
differently than other FOIA requests. Within RIDS, all of the
individuals we interviewed told us that the Clinton Foundation request
was processed just like any other FOIA request. The RIDS Section Chief
told us the FOIA process is a regimented process based on workload
queues, and that the Clinton Foundation request "just fell right into
line with this process" and this request "was a number on somebody's
spreadsheet." The RIDS Assistant Section Chief said that they followed
"the business process at the time."

We found no evidence that anyone in RMD or OPA expedited or delayed the
processing or posting of the request for any improper purpose. The RIDS
Section Chief stated that the Clinton Foundation request was processed
according to its size queue and consistent with that queue's processing
timeline. Our review of the timeline for the processing of this request
confirmed the Section Chief's assessment. RIDS located over 500 pages
responsive to the request, putting the request in the medium queue with
a stated average processing time of 9-10
months.^[^254^](#fn254){#fnref254 .footnote-ref}^ The request was
received on November 10, 2015, and was posted on November 1, 2016---just
under 12 months. The RIDS Section Chief told the OIG that the response
did not meet the average processing time because it was "an unusual
request" due to the potential FOIA exclusion, "which totally skewed
what happened." However, the RIDS SGIS who monitors the FOIA
processing time statistics, told the OIG that the time it took RIDS to
produce this response "wasn't off of the, off-timing," and he did not
think anyone had rushed it or slowed it down.

Additionally, the individuals we interviewed told us that there were no
efforts to delay the release of the Clinton Foundation documents until
after the election or efforts to expedite the release before the
election. In fact, all of the witnesses we spoke to said that at no time
were there any discussions about holding the Clinton Foundation release
until after the election or ensuring that it was released before the
election. The RIDS Section Chief told us that "there was no actual
timing involvement to get it out before the election." The RIDS
Assistant Section Chief said there were no internal discussions about
whether to hold the release until after the election. He told us that
"FOIA is a disclosure action.. There was no consideration of
timing." The National Press Office Unit Chief told us that documents
are released when they are ready for release, regardless of the date or
time period they fall under. She stated that OPA might ask for a delay
of a few hours or a day or two if they needed time to review the
documents, but would not hold back releasing information for a
substantial period of time. The witnesses interviewed denied taking any
action, or delaying any action, with regard to the FOIA request in order
to assist or harm either candidate's prospects in the election.

None of the witnesses had knowledge of any attempt to do so.

**CHAPTER SIXTEEN:**

**CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS**

**I. Conclusions**

The Clinton email investigation was one of the highest profile
investigations in the FBI's history; however, it is just one of
thousands of investigations handled each year by the approximately
35,000 FBI agents, analysts, and other professionals who dedicate their
careers to protecting the American people and upholding the Constitution
and the rule of law. Through the collective efforts of generations of
FBI employees, the FBI has developed and earned a reputation as one of
the world's premier law enforcement agencies.

The FBI has gained this reputation, in significant part, because of its
professionalism, impartiality, non-political enforcement of the law, and
adherence to detailed policies, practices, and norms. However, as we
outline in this report, certain actions during the Midyear investigation
were inconsistent with these longstanding policies, practices, and
norms.

First, we found that several FBI employees who played critical roles in
the investigation sent political messages---some of which related
directly to the Midyear investigation---that created the appearance of
bias and thereby raised questions about the objectivity and thoroughness
of the Midyear investigation. Even more seriously, text messages between
Strzok and Page pertaining to the Russia investigation, particularly a
text message from Strzok on August 8 stating "No. No he's not. We'll
stop it." in response to a Page text "Trump's not ever going to
become president, right? Right?!," are not only indicative of a biased
state of mind but imply a willingness to take official action to impact
a presidential candidate's electoral prospects. This is antithetical to
the core values of the FBI and the Department of Justice. While we did
not find documentary or testimonial evidence that improper
considerations, including political bias, directly affected the specific
investigative actions we reviewed in Chapter Five, the conduct by these
employees cast a cloud over the entire FBI investigation and sowed doubt
about the FBI's work on, and its handling of, the Midyear investigation.
It also called into question Strzok's failure in October 2016 to follow
up on the Midyear-related investigative lead discovered on the Weiner
laptop. The damage caused by these employees' actions extends far beyond
the scope of the Midyear investigation and goes to the heart of the
FBI's reputation for neutral factfinding and political independence.

Second, in key moments, then Director Comey chose to deviate from the
FBI's and the Department's established procedures and norms and instead
engaged in his own subjective, ad hoc decisionmaking. In so doing, we
found that Comey largely based his decisions on what he believed was in
the FBI's institutional interests and would enable him to continue to
effectively lead the FBI as its Director. While we did not find that
these decisions were the result of political bias on Comey's part, we
nevertheless concluded that by departing so clearly and dramatically
from FBI and Department norms, the decisions negatively impacted the
perception of the FBI and the Department as fair administrators of
justice.

Moreover, these decisions usurped the authority of the Attorney General
and upset the well-established separation between investigative and
prosecutorial functions and the accountability principles that guide law
enforcement decisions in the United States.

As we further outline in this report, there was a troubling lack of any
direct, substantive communication between Comey and then Attorney
General Lynch in advance of both Comey's July 5 press conference and his
October 28 letter to Congress. With regard to the July 5 events, Comey
affirmatively concealed his intentions from Lynch. When he did finally
call her on the morning of July 5---after the FBI first notified the
press---he told her that he was going to be speaking about the Midyear
investigation but that he would not answer any of her questions, and
would not tell her what he planned to say. During that call, Lynch did
not instruct Comey to tell her what he intended to say at the press
conference. With respect to the October 28 letter, Comey chose not to
contact Lynch or then Deputy Attorney General Yates directly; rather, he
had FBI Chief of Staff Rybicki advise Yates's senior advisor (then PADAG
Axelrod) that Comey intended to send a letter to Congress and that Comey
believed he had an obligation to do so. Given these circumstances, Lynch
and Yates concluded it would be counterproductive to speak directly with
Comey and that the most effective way to communicate their strong
opposition to Comey about his decision was to relay their views to him
through Axelrod and Rybicki. We found it extraordinary that, in advance
of two such consequential decisions, the FBI Director decided that the
best course of conduct was to not speak directly and substantively with
the Attorney General about how best to navigate these decisions and
mitigate the resulting harms, and that Comey's decision resulted in the
Attorney General and Deputy Attorney General concluding that it would be
counterproductive to speak directly with the FBI Director.

This is not the first time the Department and the FBI have conducted a
politically-charged investigation, and it will not be the last. To
protect the institutions from allegations of abuse, political
interference, and biased enforcement of the law, the Department and the
FBI have developed policies and practices to guide their decisions. In
the vast majority of cases, they are followed as a matter of routine.
But they are most important to follow when the stakes are the highest,
and when the pressures to divert from them---often based on well-founded
concerns and highly fraught scenarios---are the greatest. No rule,
policy, or practice is perfect, but at the same time, neither is any
individual's ability to make judgments under pressure or in what may
seem like unique circumstances. It is in these moments---when the
rationale for keeping to the ordinary course fades from view and the
temptation to make an exception is greatest---that the bedrock
principles and time-tested practices of the Department and the FBI can
serve their highest purpose. This notion was most effectively summarized
for us by DAAG George Toscas, who was the most senior career Department
official involved in the daily supervision of the Midyear investigation:

One of the things that I tell people all the time, after having been in
the Department for almost 24 years now, is I stress to people and people
who work at all levels, the institution has principles and there's
always an urge when something important or different pops up to say, we
should do it differently or those principles or those protocols you know
we should---we might want to deviate because this is so different. But
the comfort that we get as people, as lawyers, as representatives, as
employees and as an institution, the comfort we get from those
institutional policies, protocols, has, is an unbelievable thing through
whatever storm, you know whatever storm hits us, when you are within the
norm of the way the institution behaves, you can weather any of it
because you stand on the principle.

And once you deviate, even in a minor way, and you're always going to
want to deviate. It's always going to be something important and some
big deal that makes you think, oh let's do this a little differently.
But once you do that, you have removed yourself from the comfort of
saying this institution has a way of doing things and then every
decision is another ad hoc decision that may be informed by our policy
and our protocol and principles, but it's never going to be squarely
within them.

There are many lessons to be learned from the Department's and FBI's
handling of the Midyear investigation, but among the most important is
the need for Department and FBI leadership to follow its established
procedures and policies even in its highest-profile and most challenging
investigations. By adhering to these principles and norms, the public
will have greater confidence in the outcome of the Department's and the
FBI's decisions, and Department and FBI leaders will better protect the
interests of federal law enforcement and the dedicated professionals who
serve these institutions.

**II. Recommendations**

For these reasons, and as more fully described in previous chapters, we
recommend the following:

1.  The Department and the FBI consider developing practice guidance
    that would assist investigators and prosecutors in identifying the
    general risks with and alternatives to permitting a witness to
    attend a voluntary interview of another witness, in particular when
    the witness is serving as counsel for the other witness.
2.  The Department consider making explicit that, except in situations
    where the law requires or permits disclosure, an investigating
    agency cannot publicly announce its recommended charging decision
    prior to consulting with the Attorney General, Deputy Attorney
    General, U.S. Attorney, or his or her designee, and cannot proceed
    without the approval of one of these officials.
3.  The Department and the FBI consider adopting a policy addressing the
    appropriateness of Department employees discussing the conduct of
    uncharged individuals in public statements.
4.  The Department consider providing guidance to agents and prosecutors
    concerning the taking of overt investigative steps, indictments,
    public announcements, or other actions that could impact an
    election.
5.  The Office of the Deputy Attorney General consider taking steps to
    improve the retention and monitoring of text messages
    Departmentwide.
6.  The FBI add a warning banner to all of the FBI's mobile phones and
    mobile devices in order to further notify users that they have no
    reasonable expectation of privacy.
7.  The FBI consider (a) assessing whether it has provided adequate
    training to employees about the proper use of text messages and
    instant messages, including any related discovery obligations,
    and (b) providing additional guidance about the allowable uses of
    FBI devices for any non-governmental purpose, including guidance
    about the use of FBI devices for political conversations
8.  The FBI consider whether (a) it is appropriately educating employees
    about both its media contact policy and the Department's ethics
    rules pertaining to the acceptance of gifts, and (b) its
    disciplinary provisions and penalties are sufficient to deter such
    improper conduct.
9.  Department ethics officials consider implementing a review of
    campaign donations when Department employees or their spouses run
    for public office.

**ATTACHMENT**

**A**

![](Pictures/100000000000069D00000894AAAC6A2B11545E41.jpg)

**ATTACHMENT**

**B**

![](Pictures/10000000000006940000089EF9C4BA11D9075A65.jpg)

**FBI RESPONSE TO THE REPORT OF**

***THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE'S OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL***

The mission of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI or Bureau) is to
protect the American people and uphold the Constitution of the United
States. Within this mission, the FBI has certain priorities, including
protecting the United States against terrorist attack, foreign
intelligence operations and espionage, cyber-based attacks and
high-technology crimes, combatting public corruption at all levels,
protecting civil rights, and combating major criminal offenses.
Sometimes, the investigations and operations conducted by the FBI in
furtherance of its mission may cut against the personally held views of
certain Special Agents and other employees supporting those cases. There
is nothing inherently wrong with this; indeed, the Constitution contains
robust protections for personally held and espoused beliefs and the
freedom of association. The FBI endeavors to, and as reflected in the
Department of Justice (DOJ) Office of the Inspector General's (OIG) "A
Review of Various Actions by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and
Department of Justice in Advance of the 2016 Election" Report, succeeds
in its efforts, to maintain separation between personally held views and
the actual work of the FBI. Nevertheless, proper oversight is required
in order to ensure this separation remains effective, that the mission
comes first regardless of personal view, that all investigations proceed
objectively, and that the American people maintain their trust and
confidence that the critically important work of the FBI remains
unbiased and apolitical. The FBI appreciates the key role of the DOJ
Office of the Inspector General (OIG) in the oversight process.

Below, the FBI sets forth a response to the findings and recommendations
contained in the OIG Report. The FBI recognizes that mistakes were made.
These mistakes were errors of judgment, violations of or disregard for
policy, or, when viewed with the benefit of hindsight, simply not the
best courses of action. They were not, in any respect, the result of
bias or improper considerations. Further, the OIG Report focuses on the
conduct of several individuals acting in extraordinary and unprecedented
circumstances. None of the actions or conduct faulted by the OIG impugn
the integrity of the FBI as an institution, or of the Bureau's dedicated
37,000-person workforce as a whole.

I. *Summary of FBI Response*
----------------------------

The FBI identified eight (8) focal points, specific to the FBI, in the
OIG Report: (1) conduct creating a perception that political bias could
have influenced certain actions or decisions; (2) violation of or
disregard for DOJ or FBI policies by former Director James Comey's July
5, 2016, announcement and October 28, 2016, letter; (3) issues involving
media contacts, leaks, and ethics rules on acceptance of gifts; (4)
former Deputy Director Andrew McCabe's recusal obligations; (5) the use
of personal email accounts; (6) missteps in certain investigatory
processes; (7) insubordination by former Director Comey; and (8) the
potentially improper use of FBI systems and devices to exchange
messages, the related referrals for investigation, and the creation of
additional warning banners and guidance.

The FBI's accepts the OIG's findings that certain text messages, instant
messages, and statements, along with a failure to consistently apply DOJ
and FBI interview policies, were inappropriate and created an appearance
that political bias might have improperly influenced investigative
actions or decisions. The Bureau also agrees with the OIG that, despite
these errors and the damage they may have caused to the FBI's
reputation, there was no evidence of bias or other improper
considerations affecting the handling of the Midyear Exam (MYE)
investigation. The FBI is taking immediate remedial actions to reinforce
the importance of maintaining a work environment free from the
appearance of political bias. This includes a review of whether the
intermixing of work-related discussions with political commentary
implicates any of the FBI's Offense Codes and Penalty Guidelines. It
will further include political bias training, Hatch Act training, and,
as applicable, will also include a review of how the FBI staffs,
structures, and supervises sensitive investigations.

The FBI also accepts the OIG's findings that former Director Comey's
July 5, 2016, announcement violated DOJ's media policy and may have
violated regulations regarding the public release of information, and
that his October 28, 2016, letter was a serious error in judgment. In
the judgment of the OIG, there was no evidence that these actions were
the result of bias, political preference, or an effort to influence the
election. The Bureau takes seriously its obligations to control public
statements, especially those related to charging recommendations in
criminal investigations and uncharged conduct. Accordingly, the FBI has
issued a revised media policy, will act to further ensure that all
personnel are aware of the new policy and the serious consequences for
non-compliance, and will provide further training on media contact and
the limited authority to release information.

The OIG also identified a need to change the "cultural attitude"
regarding media contacts and leaks at the FBI. The Director has ordered
the Office of Integrity and Compliance (OIC), the Office of the General
Counsel (OGC), and the Office of Professional Responsibility (OPR) to
review how personnel are trained regarding the media policy and related
ethics rules, including those related to the acceptance of gifts, and
whether current disciplinary penalties are adequate to deter
unauthorized media contact or leaks.

The OIG made several determinations regarding former Deputy Director
McCabe's recusal from the Clinton-related investigations. Because he may
not have fully complied with his voluntary recusal obligations, the FBI
OIC has been instructed to review recusal policy and training, and make
updates as necessary to help more quickly identify and mitigate actual
or perceived conflicts of interest.^[^255^](#fn255){#fnref255
.footnote-ref}^ The FBI OGC and OIC have also been directed to work
together to develop a framework for earlier notification of potential
conflicts caused by campaign contributions to covered persons and to
provide additional training on recusal obligations and conflicts of
interest. The Director has called for the framework to be completed
within 60 days. Upon finding that former Director Comey, Lisa Page, and
Peter Strzok used personal email accounts for unclassified FBI business,
the OIG referred Mr. Strzok for an investigation into whether his
actions violated FBI and DOJ policies. This referral will be
investigated and adjudicated pursuant to FBI and DOJ policies. While,
there is no finding or indication that any classified material ever
transited former Director Comey's, Ms. Page's, or Mr. Strzok's personal
devices or accounts, the FBI OGC and OIC have been tasked to evaluate
whether additional training and messaging would reinforce the existing
policies and protocols on the use of non-FBI devices and accounts and
further minimize any non-compliance, and to report back to the Director
on their findings within 60 days.

The OIG concluded that certain MYE investigatory missteps were made. The
FBI accepts the OIG's conclusions that, in hindsight, it could have
taken additional or different investigatory actions, including moving
more quickly to secure a search warrant for Anthony Weiner's laptop, and
staffing the investigation differently so as to avoid affecting the MYE
investigation when senior members of the MYE team were assigned to the
Russia investigation. The FBI appreciates, however, that the OIG
recognized that many of the identified missteps were judgment calls by
seasoned investigators and prosecutors, and that there was no evidence
that any decision was made as the result of bias or other improper
considerations. This includes the decision not to seek personal devices
from former Secretary Clinton's senior aides, the prioritization of the
Russia investigation at the time, and the delay in seeking a search
warrant for the Weiner laptop. The FBI is convening a working group to
provide recommendations, within 120 days, for the staffing, structuring,
and supervision of sensitive investigations to help avoid or mitigate
similar missteps in the future.

The OIG also stated that former Director Comey was insubordinate by
intentionally concealing from DOJ his intentions regarding the July 5,
2016, announcement and instructing his subordinates to do the same. The
FBI does not condone insubordination at any level.

Compliance with policy -- and the chain of command as appropriate --
will be reinforced through training.

In its review of collected materials, the OIG found that several FBI
employees had exchanged text messages, instant messages, or both, that
included political statements hostile to or favoring particular
candidates, and appeared to mix political opinion with discussions about
the MYE investigation. The OIG found no evidence to connect the
political views expressed by these employees with the specific
investigative decisions, but referred five employees for investigation
into whether the messages violated the FBI's Offense Codes and Penalty
Guidelines. The FBI will handle these referrals pursuant to the FBI's
disciplinary investigation and adjudication processes, and will impose
disciplinary measures as warranted. The OIG separately recommended that
the FBI add privacy warning banners to FBI-issued mobile devices and
consider assessing whether employees are properly trained on the use of
text messages and instant messages, as well as whether it should provide
additional guidance about the use of FBI devices for non-governmental
purposes. Although the FBI has clear and unambiguous warnings related to
the use of FBI Information Technology and Systems, including FBI-issued
devices, the Executive Assistant Director of the Information and
Technology Branch has been directed to implement the suggested warnings
in the most technologically expeditious and feasible manner.

The Bureau will also provide renewed training on the governing policies
related to device use. Each of these areas is discussed in more detail
below.

II. *Detailed Response to the Eight Focal Points of the OIG Report*
-------------------------------------------------------------------

While the OIG Report contains several findings of poor judgment,
violations of or disregard for policy, and investigatory actions that
might have benefitted from a better decisionmaking process, it contains
no finding that any error in judgment, violation of policy, or
investigatory action was motivated by political bias or other improper
considerations. This is critical to the operation of the FBI and the
ability of the American people to count on the FBI to act impartially
and objectively. For the same reasons, it is equally important to note
again that the OIG Report is narrowly focused on the handful of
individuals who were the most deeply involved in running the MYE
investigation, and does not generally find fault with the FBI's
policies, practices, or procedures as they pertain to investigations,
ethical conduct, or media contacts.

**1. Conduct creating a perception that political bias could have
influenced certain actions or decisions**

The OIG identified several separate acts that created an appearance that
political bias could have influenced certain actions or decisions. The
FBI accepts that text messages exchanged over FBI-issued devices by
certain FBI employees, primarily Peter Strzok and Lisa Page,
demonstrated extremely poor judgment and a lack of professionalism. The
FBI also accepts that the content of these messages, critical of
political candidates, brought discredit upon those exchanging them and
harmed the FBI's reputation. Similarly, the FBI accepts that the
decision to allow Cheryl Mills and Heather Samuelson to be present
during the interview of former Secretary Clinton was inconsistent with
typical investigative strategy and created an appearance that political
bias could have influenced this decision, especially when viewed in the
light of messages exchanged between Mr. Strzok and Ms.
Page.^[^256^](#fn256){#fnref256 .footnote-ref}^

Despite the appearance of bias created by these actions, the OIG found
no evidence that bias affected any investigatory decision or action. As
determined by the OIG, there was no evidence of bias or other improper
considerations in former Director Comey's instruction to complete the
MYE investigation "promptly." Likewise, the OIG considered multiple
decisions and actions taken by the MYE team related to obtaining
evidence, interview timing and procedures, and the use of consent or
immunity agreements. No evidence of bias or other improper
considerations was found by the OIG in the MYE team's: use of consent,
rather than subpoenas, search warrants, or other legal process to obtain
evidence; decisions regarding how to limit consent agreements; decision
not to seek personal devices from former Secretary Clinton's senior
aides; decisions to enter into immunity agreements; decisions regarding
the timing and scoping of former Secretary Clinton's interview, or to
proceed with the interview with Cheryl Mills and Heather Samuelson
present; and, the decision to obtain testimony and other evidence from
Ms. Mills and Ms. Samuelson by consent agreement and with
act-of-production immunity. Although no bias or other improper
consideration was found in the FBI's decisions or actions, the
appearance of bias is disconcerting and potentially damaging to the
FBI's ability to perform its mission. Accordingly, the FBI is
instituting new political bias training, drawing from, among other
sources, the training, guidance, and practices of the federal judiciary.
To commence within 120 days, training will begin with senior leadership
and the Senior Executive Service (SES) ranks, with the objectives of
discussing the OIG Report, lessons learned, and the need for scrupulous,
unwavering adherence to the policies and procedures intended to combat
potential political bias. After this initial training, the Director will
require all employees to undergo similar training to reinforce the
importance of maintaining a work environment free from political bias.
The training will cover multiple areas, including at a minimum ethics
and integrity, objectivity, and the avoidance of political bias, and
will occur across multiple settings, such as Special Agent in Charge
onboarding, Senior Executive Service onboarding, Senior Leader courses,
Leading People courses, and the Basic Field Training Course. If
necessary, supplementary Hatch Act and ethics training may also be
required.

Additionally, the Director has tasked the Associate Deputy Director with
establishing a working group to provide recommendations, within 120
days, on the staffing, structuring, and supervising of sensitive
investigations in order to ensure that the full suite of the FBI's
investigative strengths, a balance of operational experience, and proper
resources are provided such that every future sensitive investigation is
conducted to the highest standards of the Bureau. This will include,
among other things, consideration of when and whether to increase field
office participation in such matters, and when and whether it would be
beneficial to team agents from different components and backgrounds to
leverage respective skill sets and experiences, *e.g.*, drawing on the
experience of public corruption agents when conducting
counterintelligence investigations.

Disciplinary referrals from the OIG Report will be handled pursuant to
the FBI's disciplinary investigation and adjudication processes. Any
allegation of misconduct by an FBI employee is reviewed, and if merited,
investigated by either the FBI Inspection Division or the DOJ OIG, as
occurred here. At the conclusion of the investigation, the matter is
referred to the FBI's OPR for adjudication. FBI employees must maintain
the highest standards of personal and institutional responsibility. The
FBI OPR ensures that the FBI maintains its rigorous standards of
integrity and professionalism by impartially adjudicating allegations of
employee misconduct. OPR's prompt, thorough, and fair adjudication of
employee misconduct cases materially enhances confidence in and support
for the FBI and its mission. With that said, the FBI OPR has already
opened and is conducting investigations, or has concluded misconduct
investigations arising out of or related to the conduct identified in
the Report. It would not be appropriate to comment here on any
particular individual who was or may be the subject of such an
investigation.

2.  **Violation of or disregard for DOJ or FBI policies by former
    Director James Comey's July 5, 2016, announcement and October 28,
    2016, letter**

The OIG found that former Director Comey violated DOJ's media policy,
and potentially regulations related to the public release of
information, when he made his July 5, 2016, announcement. He was also
found to have committed a serious error in judgment by sending his
October 28, 2016, letter, in disregard of FBI and DOJ policy, without
DOJ approval, and in usurpation of the Attorney General's authority. The
FBI does not contest these findings.

The FBI will implement the OIG's recommendation that the FBI adopt a
policy on the appropriateness of employees addressing uncharged conduct
in public statements. The Director is also tasking the FBI's OGC to
develop, within 30 days, guidance requiring prior consultation with DOJ
preceding any public reference to FBI charging recommendations in
criminal investigations.

Pursuant to the new FBI media policy, FBI personnel authorized to
communicate with the media must abide by DOJ guidelines contained in 28
CFR 50.2 "Release of information by personnel of the DOJ relating to
criminal and civil proceedings," and in the U.S. Attorney's Manual Title
1-7.000 "Confidentiality and Media Contacts Policy." This would include
receiving advanced approval by the appropriate United States Attorney or
Assistant Attorney General before communicating with the media about a
pending investigation or case, except in emergency circumstances.
Training on these policies will be included in the training described
above.

2.  **Issues involving media contacts, dissemination of information, and
    leaks**

The OIG's conclusion that there is a need to change the "cultural
attitude" regarding media contacts and leaks at the FBI is troubling.
The FBI is acutely aware of the damage unauthorized communications or
leaks can cause to investigations, prosecutions, the personal lives of
those involved in the case or who may be subjects or targets, and the
reputation of the Bureau. Leaks or unauthorized communications are not
taken lightly, are never condoned, and may result in discipline, up to
and including termination, and potentially prosecution. Given the
conclusions reached in the OIG report, the Director instructed the
Assistant Director of OPR to review whether current disciplinary
penalties are adequate to deter unauthorized media contact or leaks and
to report back on their adequacy, or the need for additional penalties,
within 30 days.

The FBI protects information on a need-to-know basis and, to reinforce
the limitations on sharing that information, revised its media policy
effective November 15, 2017. As an additional step, the FBI will ensure
that, within 30 days, all personnel are fully aware of the media policy
and the serious potential consequences for noncompliance. The new media
policy restricts who is authorized to communicate with the media
(*i.e.*, within FBI Headquarters, the Director, Deputy Director,
Associate Deputy Director, Assistant Director of the Office of Public
Affairs, and designated OPA staff; in a field office, the Assistant
Director in Charge or Special Agent in Charge, designated public affairs
officer, or other personnel specifically authorized by the field office
head). The new policy requires that "all contact with members of the
media about FBI matters must be reported" to the relevant Headquarters
or field office officials. It also requires that personnel "must
immediately notify their supervisors if contact with a member of the
media concerns suspected classified or grand jury subject matter." The
policy also requires conformance with DOJ guidelines contained in 28 CFR
50.2 "Release of information by personnel of the DOJ relating to
criminal and civil proceedings," and in the U.S. Attorney's Manual Title
1-7.000 "Confidentiality and Media Contacts Policy." The FBI's policies,
training, and disciplinary measures related to media contact and ethics
rules, combined with any additional policies and training developed
after this review, will sufficiently mitigate the risk and continue to
deter this type of misconduct.

2.  **Former Deputy Director Andrew McCabe's recusal obligations**

The OIG found that the former Deputy Director and the Bureau acted
appropriately with regard to his involvement in and recusal from the
Clinton-related investigations. The OIG concurred with the FBI's
determination that former Deputy Director McCabe was not required to
recuse from those investigations and found that he notified the
appropriate persons in the FBI to seek guidance on ethics issues. The
OIG Report also makes clear that former Deputy Director McCabe generally
abided by his voluntary recusal from Clinton-related matters after
November 1, 2016, in that there is no evidence that he continued to
supervise investigative decisions in those matters after his recusal.
The FBI agrees with the OIG that in a few instances, the former Deputy
Director did not fully comply with his voluntary recusal.

Based on the OIG's findings related to the analysis of recusal decisions
and recusal obligations, in particular the finding that FBI ethics
officials and attorneys did not fully appreciate the potential
significant implications of campaign contributions to Dr. McCabe's
campaign, and the ninth recommendation in the OIG Report, the FBI's OGC
and OIC have been directed to work together to develop a framework for
earlier notification of potential conflicts caused by campaign
contributions to covered persons and to provide additional training on
recusal obligations and conflicts of interest. The Director has mandated
that the framework be completed within 60 days.

5. The use of personal email accounts by former Director Comey and Peter Strzok
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The OIG found that former Director Comey used personal email accounts
for unclassified FBI business, absent exigent circumstances, in
contravention of FBI and DOJ policy. The OIG also found that Peter
Strzok and Lisa Page used personal email accounts for unclassified FBI
business. Although former Director Comey and Ms. Page are no longer
employed by the FBI, the OIG referred Mr. Strzok for an investigation
into whether his use of personal email accounts violated FBI or DOJ
policy. The FBI will handle this referral pursuant to the FBI's
disciplinary investigation and adjudication processes. The FBI notes
that there is no finding or indication in the OIG Report that any
classified material ever transited former Director Comey's, Ms. Page's,
or Mr. Strzok's personal devices or accounts.

The Bureau will evaluate whether additional training and messaging would
clarify and reinforce the existing policies and protocols on the use of
non-FBI devices and accounts and further minimize any non-compliance by
FBI personnel. Further, the Director has tasked the Executive Assistant
Director of the Information and Technology Branch with evaluating the
benefits of consolidating existing relevant policies and guidance
concerning the use of personal devices and accounts for FBI business, in
order to underscore the requirement for exigency in such use.

6.  **Missteps in certain investigatory processes**

Two complex, exceptionally important investigations were being conducted
concurrently by the FBI in 2016, MYE and the Russia influence
investigation. The FBI sought to staff both investigations with the
people it thought at the time were the best qualified (as it always
does). Both were close-hold, sensitive, and multifaceted. At the highest
levels of leadership then in the FBI, judgment calls and decisions were
made regarding how each investigation should proceed and how
investigatory actions should be prioritized. The OIG questioned some of
the judgment calls and decisions, including reassigning senior members
from the MYE team to the Russia influence investigation, the delay in
seeking a search warrant for Anthony Weiner's laptop, and the decision
by agents and prosecutors not to subpoena or seek search warrants for
the personal devices of three senior aides to former Secretary Clinton.
The FBI agrees that it could have moved more quickly to secure a search
warrant for Weiner's laptop and could have staffed the two
investigations differently to minimize any detrimental effect to the MYE
investigation. The addition of staff or resources may have impacted how
agents and prosecutors decided what devices to seek and review, even if
their judgment that certain devices were likely of limited evidentiary
value remained the same.

While the OIG was critical of these judgment calls and decisions, it did
not find that these were the result of bias or other improper
considerations. Rather, the OIG specifically concluded that there was no
evidence of bias or improper considerations in the decision not to seek
the personal devices from former Secretary Clinton's senior aides, the
lack of urgency in seeking a search warrant for the Weiner laptop, and
the prioritization of the Russia influence investigation. As previously
described, in an effort to learn from its past decisions, good and bad,
the FBI is establishing a working group to provide recommendations for
the staffing, structuring, and supervision of sensitive investigations
to help avoid or mitigate similar missteps in the future.

6.  **Insubordination by former Director Comey**

The OIG found that former Director Comey was insubordinate when he
intentionally concealed from DOJ his intentions regarding the July 5,
2016, announcement and instructed his subordinates to do the same. The
FBI does not condone insubordination at any level and will institute
training to ensure compliance with policy and the chain of command, as
appropriate.

6.  **The potentially improper use of FBI systems and devices to
    exchange messages, the related referrals for investigation, and the
    recommendations to create additional warning banners and guidance.**

The OIG found that several FBI employees had exchanged text messages,
instant messages, or both that included political statements. The OIG
also found that some messages appeared to mix political opinion with
discussions about the MYE investigation. The OIG concluded there is no
evidence to connect the political views expressed by these employees
with the specific MYE investigative decisions. Regarding the messages,
the FBI will handle the OIG's referrals pursuant to its disciplinary
investigation and adjudication processes and will impose disciplinary
measures as warranted.

Based on its review of these messages, the OIG separately recommended
that the FBI add privacy warning banners to FBI-issued mobile devices
and consider assessing whether employees are properly trained on the use
of text messages and instant messages and whether it should provide
additional guidance about the use of FBI devices for non-governmental
purposes. FBI employees sign a Rules of Behavior Agreement expressly
consenting to the monitoring of data communications over FBI information
systems (emails, facsimile, computer database use and data storage,
digital transmission of data, but not voice communications). This
agreement form must be signed before access to any FBI Information
Technology or Information Systems is granted. Existing policy also
advises employees that "FBI personnel using FBI information systems have
no reasonable expectation of privacy." Further, the warning banners that
appear at login on the FBI's computer systems expressly apply to "all
devices or storage media attached to this network or to a computer
on this network." Although the FBI has clear and unambiguous warnings
related to the use of FBI Information Technology and Systems, including
FBI-issued devices, the Executive Assistant Director of the Information
and Technology Branch has been directed to implement the suggested
warnings in the most technologically expeditious and feasible manner.
The Bureau will also provide enhanced training on the governing policies
related to device use, including but not limited to the use of FBI
Information Technology and Systems for political conversations.

\* \* \* \*

In addition to the focal points addressed above, which the FBI believes
are responsive to findings and recommendations in the OIG report, one
other specific and narrow recommendation deserves a brief response.

The OIG recommends that the Office of the Deputy Attorney General (ODAG)
consider taking steps to improve the retention and monitoring of text
messages Department-wide. The Bureau already goes to great lengths,
within the restrictions imposed by existing technology and practicality,
to capture and retain text messages sent or received on FBI-issued
devices. Still, the FBI stands ready to work with ODAG to improve its
processes and capabilities.

### 0.0.4. III. *Conclusion*

The FBI appreciates the role of the OIG, its dedication to its task, and
the thoroughness of its investigation in bringing to light ways in which
the FBI can improve the performance of its mission. The Bureau also
appreciates the finding that there was no evidence that bias or improper
considerations affected its investigative actions or decisions. Further,
while the OIG Report focused on only a handful of individuals, as
described above, the FBI is reviewing the recommendations of the OIG and
will be taking action that applies far more broadly to FBI leadership,
career Special Agents and Intelligence Analysts, and all the various
personnel that make the FBI the premiere law enforcement and national
security agency in the world. The FBI is extraordinarily cognizant of
the need to maintain impartiality and objectivity, and to make certain
that the American people trust it to always do so.

**ATTACHMENT**

**C**

![](Pictures/10000000000004C80000063000C5B14DADA55295.jpg)

![](Pictures/10000000000009F600000CE319D64DCF27989452.jpg)

![](Pictures/10000000000009F600000CE367854F31152BA05A.jpg)

![](Pictures/10000000000009F600000CE3A38DD91F13A46E87.jpg)

![](Pictures/10000000000009F600000CE3D0A56D13DA51AA27.jpg)

**ATTACHMENT D**

![](Pictures/10000000000009F600000CE36998999D393B18EB.jpg)

![](Pictures/10000000000009F600000CE3EE14F6A0F152B817.jpg)

![](Pictures/10000000000013EC000019C8607F426B8E4FD3C8.jpg)

![](Pictures/10000000000009F600000CE3BC864F950ED65912.jpg)

![](Pictures/10000000000013EC000019C88EC644FFE4B9B4A1.jpg)

**ATTACHMENT**

**E**

![](Pictures/10000000000004C800000630AF0112746CDC33BB.jpg)

![](Pictures/10000000000013EC000019C8112C0D1356A05160.jpg)

![](Pictures/10000000000004FB0000067269BE8D338CA92C34.jpg)

**ATTACHMENT**

**F**

![](Pictures/10000000000004FB0000067295DACAEA60E6131F.jpg)

![](Pictures/10000000000004FB00000672C11BB860C99041CA.jpg)

**ATTACHMENT**

**G**

![](Pictures/1000000000000694000004A65530529EFD0BBF74.jpg)

**ATTACHMENT**

**H**

![](Pictures/1000000000000694000004A676A4AB1706B573B4.jpg)

**APPENDIX ONE**

**CLASSIFIED**

**APPENDIX TWO**

**LAW ENFORCEMENT SENSITIVE**

![](Pictures/10000201000005D0000005B27213EA2B49773441.png)

The Department of Justice Office of the Inspector General (DOJ OIG) is a
statutorily created independent entity whose mission is to detect and
deter waste, fraud, abuse, and misconduct in the Department of Justice,
and to promote economy and efficiency in the Department's operations.

To report allegations of waste, fraud, abuse, or misconduct regarding
DOJ programs, employees, contractors, grants, or contracts please visit
or call the **DOJ OIG Hotline** at
[*oig.justice.gov/hotline*](https://oig.justice.gov/hotline)
[](https://oig.justice.gov/hotline) or (800) 869-4499.

::: {.section .footnotes}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  ::: {#fn1}
    *Federal Grand Jury Practice,* Office of Legal Education (October
    2008), *available at*
    https://dojnet.doj.gov/usao/eousa/ole/usabook/gjma/index.htm.
    [↩](#fnref1){.footnote-back}
    :::

2.  ::: {#fn2}
    The USAM also provides guidelines for the use of grand jury
    subpoenas to obtain testimony from targets or subjects of an
    investigation. "Target" means a "person as to whom the prosecutor or
    the grand jury has substantial evidence linking him or her to the
    commission of a crime and who, in the judgment of the prosecutor, is
    a putative defendant," while "subject" means a "person whose conduct
    is within the scope of the grand jury\'s investigation." USAM
    9-11.151. [↩](#fnref2){.footnote-back}
    :::

3.  ::: {#fn3}
    Under 18 U.S.C. § 2703(b)(1)(b)(ii), the court may permit delays in
    noticing a subscriber/customer for up to 90 days to avoid the
    adverse results listed at 18 U.S.C. § 2705. Those adverse results
    include: (A) endangering the life or physical safety of an
    individual; (B) flight from prosecution; (C) destruction of or
    tampering with evidence; (D) intimidation of potential witnesses;
    or (E) otherwise seriously jeopardizing an investigation or unduly
    delaying a trial. [↩](#fnref3){.footnote-back}
    :::

4.  ::: {#fn4}
    The USAM offers a non-exhaustive list of factors that should be
    weighed in judging the public interest: (1) the importance of the
    investigation or prosecution to effective enforcement of the
    criminal laws; (2) the value of the person\'s testimony or
    information to the investigation or prosecution; (3) the likelihood
    of prompt and full compliance with a compulsion order, and the
    effectiveness of available sanctions if there is no such
    compliance; (4) the person's relative culpability in connection with
    the offense or offenses being investigated or prosecuted, and his or
    her criminal history; (5) the possibility of successfully
    prosecuting the person prior to compelling his or her testimony;
    and (6) the likelihood of adverse collateral consequences to the
    person if he or she testifies under a compulsion order. USAM
    9-23.210. [↩](#fnref4){.footnote-back}
    :::

5.  ::: {#fn5}
    The reach of the legal protections offered in such a letter may
    vary, with some instances of letter immunity being restricted to the
    jurisdiction of a particular U.S. Attorney and others applying in
    multiple districts or extending nationwide, typically with the
    agreement of the other prosecutors. [↩](#fnref5){.footnote-back}
    :::

6.  ::: {#fn6}
    *See* Loretta Lynch, Attorney General, U.S. Department of Justice,
    Memorandum for all Department Employees, Election Year
    Sensitivities, April 11, 2016, 1. [↩](#fnref6){.footnote-back}
    :::

7.  ::: {#fn7}
    Lynch, Memorandum for Department Employees, 1; Eric Holder, Attorney
    General, U.S.

    Department of Justice, Memorandum for all Department Employees,
    Election Year Sensitivities, March 9, 2012, 1; Michael Mukasey,
    Attorney General, U.S. Department of Justice, Memorandum for all
    Department Employees, Election Year Sensitivities, March 5, 2008, 1.
    [↩](#fnref7){.footnote-back}
    :::

8.  ::: {#fn8}
    The Hatch Act prohibits Department employees from engaging in
    partisan political activity while on duty, in a federal facility, or
    using federal property, including using the Internet at work for
    political activities. *See* 5 U.S.C. §§ 7321-7326 (2017).
    [↩](#fnref8){.footnote-back}
    :::

9.  ::: {#fn9}
    Lynch, Memorandum for Department Employees, 1.
    [↩](#fnref9){.footnote-back}
    :::

10. ::: {#fn10}
    During late 2016, Department personnel also considered guidance in
    *The Federal Prosecution of Election Offenses* prohibiting overt
    investigative steps before an election. U.S.

    Department of Justice, *The Federal Prosecution of Election
    Offenses*, 7th edition (May 2007). However, this publication
    explicitly applies to election crimes, not to criminal
    investigations that involve candidates in an election. *See id*. at
    91-93. [↩](#fnref10){.footnote-back}
    :::

11. ::: {#fn11}
    *See* Eric Holder, *James Comey Is A Good Man, But He Made A Serious
    Mistake*, WASH. POST, Oct. 30, 2016; Jamie Gorelick and Larry
    Thompson, *James Comey is Damaging Our Democracy*,

    WASH. POST, Oct. 29, 2016; Jane Chong, *Pre-Election Disclosures:
    How Does, and Should, DOJ Analyze Edge Cases*, LAWFARE BLOG (Nov. 8,
    2016),
    https://www.lawfareblog.com/pre-election-disclosures-howdoes-and-should-doj-analyze-edge-cases
    (accessed May 8, 2018). [↩](#fnref11){.footnote-back}
    :::

12. ::: {#fn12}
    Hulser produced an excerpt of a publication, written by a former
    Deputy Chief of PIN, discussing the issues involved in choosing the
    timing for charging a public corruption case. U.S. Department of
    Justice, *Prosecution of Public Corruption Cases* (February 1988),
    214-15. [↩](#fnref12){.footnote-back}
    :::

13. ::: {#fn13}
    The October 2015 FBI Media Policy Guide is available online in the
    FBI records vault. *See* FBI Office of Public Affairs, *Media
    Relations at FBIHQ and in Field Offices Policy Guide*, October 13,
    2015, https://go.usa.gov/xQNXQ (accessed May 7, 2018). On November
    14, 2017, the FBI released a significantly revised guidance for
    media relations entitled *Public Affairs Policy Guide: Media
    Relations, External Communications, and Personal Use of Social
    Media*. [↩](#fnref13){.footnote-back}
    :::

14. ::: {#fn14}
    When FBI officials make a public comment, the FBI Office of General
    Counsel "must advise FBI OPA on the potential impact of public
    comment on.proposed and pending litigation."
    [↩](#fnref14){.footnote-back}
    :::

15. ::: {#fn15}
    The Department significantly revised the USAM Media Relations
    provisions in November 2017, retitling them under "Confidentiality
    and Media Contacts Policy." This report primarily addresses the USAM
    Media Relations provisions in effect at the time of the events
    within the scope of this review. We consider the revised USAM
    provisions related to the media in Chapter Six of this report.
    [↩](#fnref15){.footnote-back}
    :::

16. ::: {#fn16}
    We note that the policies and rules described herein do not restrict
    lawful whistleblowing, protections for which were recognized by
    Attorney General Sessions in a recent memorandum reiterating the
    Department's "commitment to protecting the rights of
    whistleblowers (*i.e.*, those employees or applicants who have made
    a lawfully protected disclosure to Congress)." Jefferson B.
    Sessions, Attorney General, U.S. Department of Justice, Memorandum
    for All Heads of Department Components, Communications with
    Congress, May 2, 2018, 2. [↩](#fnref16){.footnote-back}
    :::

17. ::: {#fn17}
    According to the Code of Federal Regulations, "the
    following-described matters are assigned to, and shall be conducted,
    handled, or supervised by, the Assistant Attorney General, Office of
    Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs: (a) Maintaining liaison
    between the Department and the Congress." 28 C.F.R. § 0.27.
    [↩](#fnref17){.footnote-back}
    :::

18. ::: {#fn18}
    While the AAG of OLA "is responsible for communications between
    Congress and the Department under the authority of the Attorney
    General" per the USAM, that authority does not override statutory
    reporting requirements to Congress, such as those required for the
    OIG found at 5 U.S.C. App. 4(a)(5). [↩](#fnref18){.footnote-back}
    :::

19. ::: {#fn19}
    On its face, this portion of USAM 1-8.030 addresses U.S. Attorney's
    Offices specifically. But the provision thereafter offers broader
    guidance that "all requests for these types of information
    should be referred to OLA." USAM 1-8.030. Moreover, a Department
    official with long-term experience in OLA explained that he viewed
    the entirety of the USAM guidance on Congressional Relations as
    helping to understand "the playing field on which we operate in
    terms of a sensitivity of congressional contacts."
    [↩](#fnref19){.footnote-back}
    :::

20. ::: {#fn20}
    The FBI is required to coordinate with OLA before sending formal
    communications to Congress regarding substantive matters that impact
    the Department. According to a Department official with long-term
    experience in OLA, the FBI can sometimes speak to Congress more
    informally by email or phone about certain types of matters like
    procedural matters, without first obtaining OLA approval.
    [↩](#fnref20){.footnote-back}
    :::

21. ::: {#fn21}
    The May 2009 Memo exempts congressional hearing communications and
    communications internal to an investigation from this requirement.
    The August 2009 Memo does not include any exemption for
    congressional hearing communications. [↩](#fnref21){.footnote-back}
    :::

22. ::: {#fn22}
    On January 29 and May 2, 2018, Attorney General Sessions released
    memoranda also entitled *Communications with Congress* that
    reiterated and expanded direction to Department and component
    personnel regarding coordination with OLA "consistent with past
    policy and practice." Among other changes, the May 2018
    memorandum states "communications between the Department and
    Congress.will be managed or coordinated by OLA to ensure that
    relevant Department and Executive Branch interests are fully
    protected." In addition, the May 2018 memorandum states that "OLA
    will review prior to transmittal all Department written
    communications to Congress, including letters.and any other
    materials intended for submission or presentation on Capitol Hill."
    [↩](#fnref22){.footnote-back}
    :::

23. ::: {#fn23}
    In 2003, then Deputy Attorney General James Comey, who was the
    Acting Attorney General after the recusal of then Attorney General
    John Ashcroft, appointed a U.S. Attorney as special counsel in a
    letter citing 28 U.S.C. §§ 509, 510, 515, which describe the
    delegation authority of the Attorney General's office. *See United
    States* v. *Scooter Libby*, 429 F.Supp. 27, 40 (D.D.C. 2006). This
    method of appointing a special counsel did not rely on Department
    regulations, eliminating restrictions on who may be appointed
    special counsel and removing guidance setting the Attorney General's
    supervisory role over the office. *See* 28 C.F.R. §§ 600.2, 600.7.
    [↩](#fnref23){.footnote-back}
    :::

24. ::: {#fn24}
    A special counsel's jurisdiction also covers "federal crimes
    committed in the course of, and with the intent to interfere with,
    the Special Counsel's investigation, such as perjury, obstruction of
    justice, destruction of evidence, and intimidation of witnesses." 28
    C.F.R. § 600.4. [↩](#fnref24){.footnote-back}
    :::

25. ::: {#fn25}
    Under the USAM, the Department's National Security Division (NSD)
    must expressly approve any prosecution involving these statutory
    provisions. *See* USAM 9-90.020. [↩](#fnref25){.footnote-back}
    :::

26. ::: {#fn26}
    *See* Exec. Order 13526 §§ 4.1(a)(1)-(3), 6.1(dd) (Dec. 29, 2009);
    *see also United States*

    v\. *Truong Dinh Hung*, 629 F.2d 908, 919 n.10 (4th Cir. 1980).
    [↩](#fnref26){.footnote-back}
    :::

27. ::: {#fn27}
    *See*, *e.g.*, *United States* v. *Hitselberger*, 991 F. Supp. 2d
    101, 104 (D.D.C. 2013) (Navy linguist who printed and removed Secret
    documents indicted under 793(e)); *United States* v. *Chattin*, 33
    M.J. 802, 803 (1991) (Navy seaman who stuffed classified document
    down his pants and walked out of a secure facility charged under
    793(e)). [↩](#fnref27){.footnote-back}
    :::

28. ::: {#fn28}
    *Rosen I,* 445 F. Supp. 2d at 623; *see also* *Hitselberger*, 991 F.
    Supp. 2d at 106 (document marked "Secret" was "information relating
    to the national defense" because the classification level indicated
    that it would cause serious damage to the security of the United
    States if lost, and defendant's training placed him on notice that
    the government considers information in classified documents
    important to national security); *United States* v. *Kiriakou*, 2012
    WL 3263854, at \*6 (E.D. Va. 2012) (unreported decision) (rejecting
    defendant's argument that 793(d) is unconstitutionally vague because
    courts have relied on the classified status of information to
    determine whether it is closely held by the government and harmful
    to the United States); *United States* v. *Kim*, 808 F. Supp. 2d 44,
    53 (D.D.C. 2011) ("Defendant's vagueness challenge is particularly
    unpersuasive in light of the fact that he is charged with disclosing
    the contents of an intelligence report.which was marked TOP
    SECRET/SENSITIVE COMPARTMENTED INFORMATION..").
    [↩](#fnref28){.footnote-back}
    :::

29. ::: {#fn29}
    Several weeks before trial was scheduled to begin, prosecutors moved
    to dismiss the indictment based on the "unexpectedly higher
    evidentiary threshold" required to prevail at trial. *See* Motion to
    Dismiss, *United States* v. *Rosen*, Crim. No. 1:05CR225 (E.D. Va.
    filed May 1, 2009). [↩](#fnref29){.footnote-back}
    :::

30. ::: {#fn30}
    *Bryan* v. *United States*, 524 U.S. 184, 190 (1998) (*cited in
    Hitselberger*, 991 F. Supp. 2d at 107-08); *see also* *Morison*, 844
    F.2d at 1071; *United States* v. *Truong*, 629 F.2d 908, 918-19 (4th
    Cir. 1980). [↩](#fnref30){.footnote-back}
    :::

31. ::: {#fn31}
    *Rosen I*, 445 F. Supp. 2d at 625 (internal citation omitted).
    [↩](#fnref31){.footnote-back}
    :::

32. ::: {#fn32}
    *See Hitselberger*, 991 F. Supp. 2d at 105; *Drake*, 818 F. Supp. 2d
    909, 916-17 (D. Md.); *see also United States* v. *Leung*, No.
    03-CR-434 (C.D. Cal. Jul. 14, 2003). [↩](#fnref32){.footnote-back}
    :::

33. ::: {#fn33}
    *See Rosen I*, 445 F. Supp. 2d at 643; *see also* Memorandum
    Opinion, *United States* v. *Sterling*, No. 1:10-CR-00485-LHB (filed
    Jun. 28, 2011) (government asserted that it must prove that the
    defendant acted willfully and had reason to believe the information
    would harm the United States where he is alleged to have disclosed
    classified information). [↩](#fnref33){.footnote-back}
    :::

34. ::: {#fn34}
    *Id.* at 625; *Morison*, 844 F.2d at 1073; *Truong*, 629 F.2d at
    918-19 (4th Cir. 1980); *see also Gorin* v. *United States*, 312
    U.S. 19 (1941) (holding that information "connected with" or
    "relating to" the national defense used in the predecessor to a
    related Espionage Act statute was not unconstitutionally vague
    because the statute included a scienter requirement).
    [↩](#fnref34){.footnote-back}
    :::

35. ::: {#fn35}
    *See* Exec. Order 13526, § 4.1(d). [↩](#fnref35){.footnote-back}
    :::

36. ::: {#fn36}
    *See* Plea Agreement and Factual Basis, *United States* v.
    *Petraeus*, Crim. No. 3:15-CR-47

    (W.D.N.C. filed Mar. 3, 2015); Information, *Petraeus*, 2015 WL
    1884065 (W.D.N.C. filed Mar. 3, 2015)

    (charging Petraeus with knowingly removing classified documents
    "without authority and with the [↩](#fnref36){.footnote-back}
    :::

37. ::: {#fn37}
    *See United States* v. *Hitselberger*, 991 F. Supp. 2d 108, 124
    (D.D.C. 2014) (*See United States* v. *Rosner*, 352 F.Supp. 915,
    919-20 (S.D.N.Y. 1972); *United States* v. *North*, 716 F.Supp. 644,
    647 (D.D.C. 1989). [↩](#fnref37){.footnote-back}
    :::

38. ::: {#fn38}
    *See United States* v. *Moylan*, 417 F.2d 1002, 1004 (4th Cir.
    1969). [↩](#fnref38){.footnote-back}
    :::

39. ::: {#fn39}
    As described in Chapter Five, the FBI discovered three servers that
    for different periods stored work-related emails sent or received by
    Clinton during her tenure as Secretary of State.
    [↩](#fnref39){.footnote-back}
    :::

40. ::: {#fn40}
    *See* U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, *Review of the
    Terrorist Attacks on U.S. Facilities in Benghazi, Libya, September
    11-12, 2012*, 113th Cong, 2d sess., 2014, S. Rept. 113-134,
    https://www.intelligence.senate.gov/sites/default/files/publications/113134.pdf
    (accessed May 7, [↩](#fnref40){.footnote-back}
    :::

41. ::: {#fn41}
    *See* U.S. Department of State Office of the Inspector General
    (State IG), *Office of the Secretary: Evaluation of Email Records
    Management and Cybersecurity Requirements*, ESP-16-03 (May 2016),
    https://oig.state.gov/system/files/esp-16-03.pdf (accessed May 7,
    2018), 3. [↩](#fnref41){.footnote-back}
    :::

42. ::: {#fn42}
    *See* State IG, *Office of the Secretary*, 4.
    [↩](#fnref42){.footnote-back}
    :::

43. ::: {#fn43}
    According to documents we reviewed, BleachBit is a "freely available
    software that advertises the ability to 'shred' files. 'Shredding'
    is designed to prevent recovery of a file by overwriting the
    content." [↩](#fnref43){.footnote-back}
    :::

44. ::: {#fn44}
    JAMES COMEY, A HIGHER LOYALTY: TRUTH, LIES, AND LEADERSHIP at 162
    (Amy Einhorn, ed., 1st ed. [↩](#fnref44){.footnote-back}
    :::

45. ::: {#fn45}
    Strzok was promoted to a Section Chief in the Counterintelligence
    Division in February 2016, and to Deputy Assistant Director (DAD) in
    the fall of 2016. [↩](#fnref45){.footnote-back}
    :::

46. ::: {#fn46}
    A Deputy Assistant Director in the Counterintelligence Division was
    between the Section Chief and Coleman in the reporting chain but had
    limited involvement in the Midyear investigation.
    [↩](#fnref46){.footnote-back}
    :::

47. ::: {#fn47}
    Anderson now is the Principal Deputy General Counsel.
    [↩](#fnref47){.footnote-back}
    :::

48. ::: {#fn48}
    Other senior FBI officials involved in the Midyear investigation
    received additional briefings as needed. The Deputy Director, EAD,
    and AD met on a daily basis regarding significant matters affecting
    the Counterintelligence Division, and these meetings at times
    included significant developments in the Midyear investigation.
    McCabe said he was briefed when issues arose. In addition, the Lead
    Analyst and Strzok briefed Giacalone on the Midyear investigation on
    a weekly basis. [↩](#fnref48){.footnote-back}
    :::

49. ::: {#fn49}
    This section does not contain an exhaustive list of investigative
    efforts in the Midyear investigation, but rather is intended to be
    an overview of the Midyear team's investigative strategy. We discuss
    the specific investigative steps used during the Midyear
    investigation in Chapter Five. [↩](#fnref49){.footnote-back}
    :::

50. ::: {#fn50}
    *See* U.S. Senate, Select Committee on Intelligence, *Open Hearing
    with Former FBI Director James Comey*, 115th Cong., 1st sess., June
    8, 2017,
    https://www.intelligence.senate.gov/hearings/open-hearing-former-fbi-director-james-comey\#
    (accessed May 8, 2018). [↩](#fnref50){.footnote-back}
    :::

51. ::: {#fn51}
    Based on notes and Department emails, the OIG determined that
    Lynch's call with Senator Grassley was scheduled for later that same
    day, September 28, 2015. According to talking points prepared for
    this call, Lynch intended to tell Senator Grassley that the
    Department could neither confirm nor deny the existence of any
    ongoing investigation or persons or entities under investigation,
    consistent with longstanding Department policy. The talking points
    stated, "This policy, which has been applied across Administrations,
    is designed to protect the integrity of our investigations and to
    avoid any appearance of political influence."
    [↩](#fnref51){.footnote-back}
    :::

52. ::: {#fn52}
    *See* Matt Apuzzo et al., *In Trying to Avoid Politics, Comey Shaped
    an Election*, N.Y. TIMES, Apr. 23, 2017, at A1 (referencing two
    sources who reportedly heard Toscas state, "I guess you're the
    Federal Bureau of Matters now."). [↩](#fnref52){.footnote-back}
    :::

53. ::: {#fn53}
    *See*, *e.g.*, Pete Williams, *FBI Director Acknowledges Agency
    Looking Into Clinton Emails*, NBC NEWS, Oct. 1, 2015,
    http://nbcnews.to/1LmHuMM (accessed Jan. 18, 2018).
    [↩](#fnref53){.footnote-back}
    :::

54. ::: {#fn54}
    U.S. Senate, Committee on the Judiciary, *Oversight of the U.S.
    Department of Justice*, 114th Cong., 2d sess., March 9, 2016,
    https://www.judiciary.senate.gov/meetings/oversight-of-theus-department-of-justice.
    [↩](#fnref54){.footnote-back}
    :::

55. ::: {#fn55}
    *See* Transcript, *President Barack Obama on FOX News Sunday*, Apr.
    10, 2016, *at*
    http://www.foxnews.com/transcript/2016/04/10/exclusive-president-barack-obama-on-fox-newssunday.html
    (accessed Mar. 22, 2018). [↩](#fnref55){.footnote-back}
    :::

56. ::: {#fn56}
    The Midyear Supervisory Special Agent told us that the State
    Department provided these emails to the FBI in paper form. According
    to the LHM, on August 6, 2015, Clinton's attorneys voluntarily
    provided the FBI thumb drives containing the same emails.
    [↩](#fnref56){.footnote-back}
    :::

57. ::: {#fn57}
    Strzok told us that in this text message he was referring to the
    fact that "Secretary Clinton had always said she never received
    anything marked classified," and that the new discovery of the
    emails with the (C) markings was inconsistent with that claim. The
    emails with the (C) markings, Clinton's statements about them during
    her FBI interview, and the Midyear team's assessment of her
    credibility are discussed in Section IX.C of this chapter.
    [↩](#fnref57){.footnote-back}
    :::

58. ::: {#fn58}
    Sullivan was Clinton's Deputy Chief of Staff for Policy from January
    2009 to February 2011 and Director of Policy and Planning at the
    State Department from February 2011 to January 2013.
    [↩](#fnref58){.footnote-back}
    :::

59. ::: {#fn59}
    Clinton told the FBI that Blumenthal was a "longtime friend" who
    "frequently sent information he thought would be useful" to her as
    Secretary of State. [↩](#fnref59){.footnote-back}
    :::

60. ::: {#fn60}
    According to Hanley's FD-302, she told the FBI that the archives
    were created because Clinton "did not want to lose her old emails
    when she changed her email address." She further told the FBI that
    PRN advised Clinton to change her email address after Sidney
    Blumenthal's email account was compromised.
    [↩](#fnref60){.footnote-back}
    :::

61. ::: {#fn61}
    As discussed in Section III of this chapter, the Midyear team
    obtained a search warrant for the dummy email account and recovered
    some of Clinton's work-related emails from that account.
    [↩](#fnref61){.footnote-back}
    :::

62. ::: {#fn62}
    According to documentation we reviewed, the first individual was a
    senior State

    Department official who sometimes used a private email account to
    communicate with Clinton. The FBI sought a 2703(d) order for this
    individual's private email account after discovering an email sent
    from his private email account that the FBI determined was
    classified at the SECRET//NOFORN level. The abbreviation "NOFORN"
    means that the information may not be released to foreign
    governments, foreign nationals, foreign organizations, or non-U.S.
    citizens without the permission of the originator. According to
    Strzok's and the Lead Analyst's notes from early June 2016, the FBI
    received the returns from this 2703(d) order and determined that, as
    of that time, the email containing classified information no longer
    resided in this individual's account.

    According to the 2703(d) order for the second individual's account,
    an email containing information that the FBI determined to be
    classified at the SECRET//NOFORN level was originated from his
    private email account and forwarded, after traversing two other
    private email accounts, to Mills's private Gmail account. This
    individual was not a State Department employee and was not a witness
    in the FBI's investigation. Rather, the 2703(d) order stated that
    the FBI believed this individual resided in Japan based on his phone
    number and address and that "a search of relevant databases
    revealed no U.S. Government security clearances" for him.
    According to Strzok's and the [↩](#fnref62){.footnote-back}
    :::

63. ::: {#fn63}
    The attorneys produced two other Blackberry devices that they stated
    might contain relevant emails, but, according to the LHM, "FBI
    forensic analysis found no evidence to indicate either of these
    devices.were connected to one of Clinton\'s personal servers or
    contained emails from her personal accounts during her tenure." The
    FBI also obtained three of Clinton's iPads, one of which contained
    three emails from her tenure. [↩](#fnref63){.footnote-back}
    :::

64. ::: {#fn64}
    In the March 24, 2016 email, Strzok stated that he had asked the SSA
    to work on the list. Strzok blind-copied Page on this email, who
    responded to Strzok later that day to explain that McCabe wanted the
    list to be "done quietly" and Strzok should tell the SSA to "stand
    down and just say you'll handle it." Page told us that McCabe wanted
    the list done quietly because it would not be
    "well-[↩](#fnref64){.footnote-back}
    :::

65. ::: {#fn65}
    As noted in footnote 64 of this report, the 30,490 emails provided
    by Clinton's attorneys to the State Department contained no emails
    sent or received by Clinton during the first two months of
    [↩](#fnref65){.footnote-back}
    :::

66. ::: {#fn66}
    FBI analysts and Prosecutor 2 told us that former President Barack
    Obama was one of the 13 individuals with whom Clinton had direct
    contact using her clintonemail.com account. Obama, like other high
    level government officials, used a pseudonym for his username on his
    official government email account. The analysts told us that they
    questioned whether Obama's email address (combined with salutations
    that revealed that the emails were being exchanged with Obama) or
    other information contained in the emails were classified and, thus,
    sent the emails to relevant USIC agencies for classification review.
    However, they stated that the USIC agencies determined that none of
    the emails contained classified information.
    [↩](#fnref66){.footnote-back}
    :::

67. ::: {#fn67}
    The senior aides' personal devices were potential sources of
    work-related emails or remnants of work-related emails that the
    senior aides had deleted and were not preserved on the commercial
    providers' servers. [↩](#fnref67){.footnote-back}
    :::

68. ::: {#fn68}
    According to records we reviewed, the Midyear team also served
    preservation orders on Google and Yahoo! in relation to Mills's and
    Abedin's personal email accounts. [↩](#fnref68){.footnote-back}
    :::

69. ::: {#fn69}
    As described in Chapter Two, 18 U.S.C. §§ 793(d), 793(e), and 793(f)
    require the information that is alleged to be mishandled to be
    "information relating to the national defense." This is also
    referred to as "national defense information" or NDI, and is not
    synonymous with classified information.
    [↩](#fnref69){.footnote-back}
    :::

70. ::: {#fn70}
    As noted previously, while the government could also have issued a
    subpoena for any laptops or cellular telephones, it would not have
    been able to search the electronic communications within such a
    device without a search warrant. *See, e.g*.*,*
    [*Trulock*](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)
    [v](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)[*.*](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)
    [](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)
    [*Freeh*](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)[,
    275 F.3d 391, 403
    (4th](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)
    [Cir. 2001)](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)[.](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2001591805&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I26f2c8602e5211e68e80d394640dd07e&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_403&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Search)#co_pp_sp_506_403)
    [↩](#fnref70){.footnote-back}
    :::

71. ::: {#fn71}
    FBI Attorney 1 told us that she believed the personal laptop that
    Mills had used to cull Clinton's emails was the same personal laptop
    she had used during her tenure at State. As described in Section
    VIII.D of this chapter, the FBI ultimately obtained Mills's culling
    laptop and the laptop did contain some emails from Clinton's State
    Department tenure. We were unable to determine whether this was in
    fact the personal device Mills used during her tenure at State and,
    if so, if she also used other personal devices.
    [↩](#fnref71){.footnote-back}
    :::

72. ::: {#fn72}
    According to a report prepared by one analyst, the team had found
    through various sources 1,716 work-related emails between Clinton's
    and Abedin's clintonemail.com accounts that had not been produced to
    the State Department by Clinton's lawyers, and that 90 of these
    emails contained classified information. The analyst who prepared
    the report told us that only approximately 32 email exchanges
    between Abedin and Clinton were included in the production, which
    was surprising to the FBI given Abedin's prominent role on Clinton's
    staff. According to the written analysis he prepared, the problem
    was likely that Clinton's attorneys only considered Clinton's
    exchanges with Abedin's clintonemail.com account to be work-related
    if they were also sent to a .gov account or contained a specific
    work-related key term. [↩](#fnref72){.footnote-back}
    :::

73. ::: {#fn73}
    As we discuss in Chapter Eleven, in October 2016, when the Midyear
    team was drafting the search warrant affidavit for the Weiner
    laptop, Baker questioned why the team was not seeking to review all
    of Abedin's emails on Weiner's laptop. He wrote, "I'm still
    concerned we are viewing the PC too narrowly. There is PC to believe
    that Huma used her email accounts to mishandle classified
    [↩](#fnref73){.footnote-back}
    :::

74. ::: {#fn74}
    *See* DIOG § 18.5.6 (recording of noncustodial interviews is
    optional; no requirement that witnesses be placed under oath during
    voluntary interviews). [↩](#fnref74){.footnote-back}
    :::

75. ::: {#fn75}
    *See* USAM 9-90.230. [↩](#fnref75){.footnote-back}
    :::

76. ::: {#fn76}
    As described in Chapter Four, Lynch told us that she received a
    memorandum regarding congressional immunity issues for Pagliano, but
    only because Senator Charles Grassley had requested a phone call
    with her regarding Pagliano. [↩](#fnref76){.footnote-back}
    :::

77. ::: {#fn77}
    Rosalind S. Helderman and Carol D. Leonnig, *Clintons Personally
    Paid State Department Staffer to Maintain Server*, WASH. POST, Sept.
    5, 2015. [↩](#fnref77){.footnote-back}
    :::

78. ::: {#fn78}
    According to the FD-302 of Pagliano's subsequent interview pursuant
    to the immunity agreement, Pagliano told the FBI that at the time he
    built the Pagliano server he did not know Clinton would be Secretary
    of State or would have an account on the server. Rather, he told the
    FBI that he "believed the email server he was building would be used
    for private email exchange with Bill Clinton aides."
    [↩](#fnref78){.footnote-back}
    :::

79. ::: {#fn79}
    Mills told the FBI that she did not recall the conversation with
    Pagliano. [↩](#fnref79){.footnote-back}
    :::

80. ::: {#fn80}
    According to the FD-302, contemporaneous notes, and exhibits, the
    agents also asked

    Combetta about a July 24, 2014 email to Pagliano regarding using a
    "text expression editor."

    Combetta told the agents that Mills was concerned that Clinton's
    then current email address would be "disclosed publicly" when her
    archived emails were provided to the State IG, because "when a user
    changes his or her email address, Outlook updates the old email
    address with the new email address." We found that this might
    explain later media reports that Combetta posted on Reddit on or
    about July 24, 2014, "I may be facing a very interesting situation
    where I need to strip out a VIP's (VERY VIP) email address from a
    bunch of archived email.." *See*, *e.g.*, Caitlin Dewey, *Hillary
    Clinton's IT Guy Asked Reddit for Help Altering Emails, A Twitter
    Sleuth Claims*, WASH. POST, Sept. 20, 2016.
    [↩](#fnref80){.footnote-back}
    :::

81. ::: {#fn81}
    The Midyear team did not first conduct a Queen for a Day proffer
    with Combetta, as they did with Pagliano. Prosecutors typically
    enter Queen for a Day immunity agreements before offering letter use
    immunity, because Queen for a Day agreements allow the government to
    assess the usefulness and reliability of the witness's expected
    testimony before agreeing not to use leads obtained from the
    testimony to develop evidence against the witness.
    [↩](#fnref81){.footnote-back}
    :::

82. ::: {#fn82}
    This language meant that Combetta could be prosecuted for lying
    during his May 3 immunized interview. However, the government could
    not use Combetta's statements on May 3 to prosecute him for lying in
    the past, including during the previous two Midyear interviews.
    [↩](#fnref82){.footnote-back}
    :::

83. ::: {#fn83}
    Department of State Office of Inspector General, Office of the
    Secretary: Evaluation of Email Records Management and Cybersecurity
    Requirements (May 2016), Evaluations and Special Projects Report
    ES-16-03, https://oig.state.gov/system/files/esp-16-03.pdf (accessed
    May 7, 2018). [↩](#fnref83){.footnote-back}
    :::

84. ::: {#fn84}
    By comparison, personal devices used by other persons who might have
    sent or received emails to or from addresses on the Clinton servers
    would only contain the emails sent or received by that person.
    [↩](#fnref84){.footnote-back}
    :::

85. ::: {#fn85}
    Prosecutor 1 told us that the Midyear team did not have an
    investigative need to interview Samuelson concerning her time at
    State. [↩](#fnref85){.footnote-back}
    :::

86. ::: {#fn86}
    Wilkinson also represented two other witnesses, a former senior
    State Department official and Jake Sullivan. According to emails we
    reviewed, Wilkinson agreed to provide the former senior State
    Department official for an interview, but at first refused to
    provide Sullivan, although she acknowledged that Sullivan never had
    an attorney-client relationship with Clinton. On January 14,
    [↩](#fnref86){.footnote-back}
    :::

87. ::: {#fn87}
    , the prosecutors prepared a memorandum requesting authorization to
    notify Wilkinson that the Department was prepared to issue a grand
    jury subpoena for Sullivan's testimony, as well as authorization to
    issue the grand jury subpoena if Wilkinson continued to object. On
    January 18, 2016, Toscas emailed Laufman approving both requests.
    Wilkinson ultimately agreed to provide Sullivan for a voluntary
    interview, which took place on February 27, 2016.
    [↩](#fnref87){.footnote-back}
    :::

88. ::: {#fn88}
    Specifically, they indicated that they intended to ask Mills and
    Samuelson questions falling into three categories: "(1) receipt of
    emails from PRN; (2) general questions about the culling process
    that do not implicate the attorney-client privilege; and (3)
    handling of the emails, which have been confirmed to contain
    classified information." [↩](#fnref88){.footnote-back}
    :::

89. ::: {#fn89}
    Page told us that she had been a prosecutor in the Department's
    Organized Crime and Racketeering Section before joining the FBI.
    [↩](#fnref89){.footnote-back}
    :::

90. ::: {#fn90}
    Baker told us that he had known Wilkinson for many years, and
    documents show that she had previously reached out to him in Midyear
    as part of a broad effort to speak with senior

    Department and FBI officials, up to and including Attorney General
    Lynch. Lynch and other high level Department officials told us that
    they did not speak with Wilkinson during the course of the
    investigation. [↩](#fnref90){.footnote-back}
    :::

91. ::: {#fn91}
    During the interview, according to the FD-302, Mills told the FBI
    that she "did not learn Clinton was using a private server until
    after Clinton's State Department tenure." The FD-302 further
    states, "Mills stated she was not even sure she knew what a server
    was at the time." Abedin similarly told the FBI that she "did not
    know that Clinton had a private server until.it became public
    knowledge." The prosecutors told us that they found it credible that
    Mills and Abedin did not understand that Clinton had a "private
    server," even though Mills and Abedin knew Clinton had an email
    account on the clintonemail.com domain. They further stated that
    Mills's and Abedin's statements were consistent with what the
    prosecutors understood to be Mills's and Abedin's limited technical
    knowledge and abilities. [↩](#fnref91){.footnote-back}
    :::

92. ::: {#fn92}
    Opinion work product is attorney work product that involves "mental
    impressions, conclusions, opinions, or legal theories" concerning
    litigation and, like communications protected by
    [↩](#fnref92){.footnote-back}
    :::

93. ::: {#fn93}
    O'Brien told us that even if the laptops were still in the
    possession of Mills and Samuelson, "we still would have looked to
    determine whether we could obtain the materials with a subpoena
    rather than doing a search warrant," as required by the USAM.
    [↩](#fnref93){.footnote-back}
    :::

94. ::: {#fn94}
    C.F.R. § 59.1 and USAM 9-19.220 apply to the use of process against
    "distinterested third parties." Pursuant to 28 C.F.R. § 59.1, "It is
    the responsibility of federal officers and employees to.protect
    against unnecessary intrusions. Generally, when [documentary
    materials](https://www.law.cornell.edu/definitions/index.php?width=840&height=800&iframe=true&def_id=4a131800ced831eee18e41c1e4940ecd&term_occur=2&term_src=Title:28:Chapter:I:Part:59:59.1)
    [](https://www.law.cornell.edu/definitions/index.php?width=840&height=800&iframe=true&def_id=4a131800ced831eee18e41c1e4940ecd&term_occur=2&term_src=Title:28:Chapter:I:Part:59:59.1)
    are held by a [disinterested third
    party,](https://www.law.cornell.edu/definitions/index.php?width=840&height=800&iframe=true&def_id=c7910d04083ac94b0995e93a0d88c168&term_occur=1&term_src=Title:28:Chapter:I:Part:59:59.1)
    a subpoena, administrative summons, or governmental request will be
    an effective alternative to the use of a search warrant and will be
    considerably less intrusive." Similarly, USAM 9-19.220 provides, "As
    with other disinterested third parties, a search warrant should
    normally not be used to obtain.confidential materials" from a
    disinterested third party attorney."

    USAM 9-13.420 applies to searches of the premises of an attorney
    that is a "suspect, subject or target" of an investigation and
    provides: "In order to avoid impinging on valid attorney-client
    relationships, prosecutors are expected to take the least intrusive
    approach consistent with vigorous and effective law enforcement when
    evidence is sought from an attorney actively engaged in the practice
    of law." [↩](#fnref94){.footnote-back}
    :::

95. ::: {#fn95}
    The policies set forth in the USAM are binding on both FBI and
    Department employees. [↩](#fnref95){.footnote-back}
    :::

96. ::: {#fn96}
    The USAM did not require Criminal Division approval for the search
    warrant, just consultation once the request for had been approved by
    a U.S. Attorney (here that was Boente).

    USAM 9-13.420(C) [↩](#fnref96){.footnote-back}
    :::

97. ::: {#fn97}
    The consent agreements also each provided: "As soon as the
    investigation is completed, and to the extent consistent with all
    FBI policies and applicable laws, including the Federal Records Act,
    the FBI will dispose of the Device and any printed or electronic
    materials resulting from your search." According to talking points
    drafted by members of the Midyear team in October 2016, the FBI had
    agreed to destroy the laptops because the laptops contained
    classified information and, as such, could not be returned to the
    attorneys following compliance with FOIA and Federal Records Act
    obligations. The draft talking points stated that as of October 2016
    the laptops had not been destroyed, because the FBI was still "under
    a legal obligation to preserve the laptops and other electronic
    media due to numerous pending FOIA requests." On June 11, 2018, the
    FBI informed the OIG that the FBI still had in its possession the
    culling laptops and all other evidence collected during the Midyear
    investigation. [↩](#fnref97){.footnote-back}
    :::

98. ::: {#fn98}
    FBI employees have the ability to communicate internally via
    Microsoft Lync instant messages when logged on to their FBI
    workstation. We discovered several Lync messages that were relevant
    to our review, and we discuss these in Section XI of this chapter
    and in Chapter Twelve. [↩](#fnref98){.footnote-back}
    :::

99. ::: {#fn99}
    As noted in Section V of this chapter, the Midyear team also did not
    seek a search warrant of Mills's personal Gmail account for email
    exchanges following Clinton's tenure, when she had an
    attorney-client relationship with Clinton.
    [↩](#fnref99){.footnote-back}
    :::

100. ::: {#fn100}
    Comey also told us that he was not "troubled or struck" by the
    Department's decision to have NSD run the investigation.
    [↩](#fnref100){.footnote-back}
    :::

101. ::: {#fn101}
    Both FBI and Department witnesses, including Comey, told us that the
    Midyear team had originally planned to interview Clinton much
    earlier, but the interview was delayed because other tasks took
    longer than expected to complete. [↩](#fnref101){.footnote-back}
    :::

102. ::: {#fn102}
    "I'm with her" was one of the Clinton campaign slogans.
    [↩](#fnref102){.footnote-back}
    :::

103. ::: {#fn103}
    In the March 31, 2016 PRAO request seeking advice on whether the
    prosecutors could seek a waiver of attorney-client privilege from
    Kendall, Laufman wrote that Wilkinson had represented that her
    clients' interests "may differ from, or conflict with" Clinton's
    interests. [↩](#fnref103){.footnote-back}
    :::

104. ::: {#fn104}
    As part of the application for the subpoenas for the laptops, the
    prosecutors had to answer whether Mills and Samuelson had ongoing
    attorney client relationships with Clinton and whether the subpoenas
    would have any potential adverse effects on those relationships. The
    prosecutors wrote in the applications that Wilkinson had represented
    that Mills and Samuelson continued to have attorneyclient
    relationships with Clinton, but that "the nature and scope of that
    representation is unclear given that the former Secretary has
    separate counsel (David Kendall) representing her during this
    investigation." They further wrote, "Even if Mills and Samuelson
    are representing Clinton in conjunction with this matter, it is
    highly unlikely that issuance of the subpoena would result in Mills
    being disqualified from representing the former Secretary."
    [↩](#fnref104){.footnote-back}
    :::

105. ::: {#fn105}
    Prosecutor 4 stated that once he realized there was no prosecutable
    case, he had two goals in the investigation: "One was to conduct the
    investigation quickly to get it resolved before the election, as
    soon before the election as possible. And the second was to do it in
    a way that would engender public trust to the maximum extent
    possible." [↩](#fnref105){.footnote-back}
    :::

106. ::: {#fn106}
    Due to fact that the OIG's review was ongoing at the time, the FBI
    sought and obtained permission from the OIG to conduct the File
    Review. [↩](#fnref106){.footnote-back}
    :::

107. ::: {#fn107}
    The File Review Report also described a concern that the Midyear
    Team was "directly supervised by CD-4 personnel in FBIHQ as
    opposed to an SSA and ASAC as found during field office
    investigations." In fact, at the time the Midyear investigation
    began, Strzok was an ASAC in the FBI's Washington Field Office (WFO)
    and the Midyear SSA was an SSA in WFO.
    [↩](#fnref107){.footnote-back}
    :::

108. ::: {#fn108}
    Additionally, the File Review Report expressed a concern regarding
    the timing of the Pagliano declination letter, but we found that
    this concern was based on incomplete information. The report stated,
    "It was unclear to the file review team the need for such an
    expedited prosecution declination." However, the File Review SSAs
    told us they were unaware that the declination concerned only
    Pagliano's compensation from the Clintons (for which PIN ultimately
    determined he faced no criminal exposure), and not the mishandling
    of classified information or destruction of federal records.
    [↩](#fnref108){.footnote-back}
    :::

109. ::: {#fn109}
    As we describe in this chapter and in Chapter Twelve, many of those
    messages reflected hostility toward then candidate Trump and
    statements of support for candidate Clinton, and some of them mixed
    political commentary with discussions regarding the Midyear
    investigation. [↩](#fnref109){.footnote-back}
    :::

110. ::: {#fn110}
    As discussed in Section X of this chapter, FBI INSD conducted a File
    Review of the Midyear investigation. We found that the File Review's
    ability to assess the Midyear investigation was limited based on the
    narrow scope of the review and the limited information available to
    them. We also found that, as a result of the limited information
    available to the File Review SSAs, a number of the factual
    statements in the File Review report were inaccurate. Accordingly,
    the assessments and recommendations of the File Review did not
    significantly influence the analysis of the OIG, which had a far
    more developed record, including extensive interviews, as discussed
    in our report. [↩](#fnref110){.footnote-back}
    :::

111. ::: {#fn111}
    As we describe in Chapter Nine, these text messages also caused us
    to assess Strzok's decision in October 2016 to prioritize the Russia
    investigation over following up on the Midyear-related investigative
    lead discovered on the Weiner laptop. We concluded that we did not
    have confidence that this decision by Strzok was free from bias.
    [↩](#fnref111){.footnote-back}
    :::

112. ::: {#fn112}
    For example, based on the FD-302 from Clinton's interview, Clinton
    told the interviewing agents that she "expected her team to provide
    any work-related or arguably work-related emails to State." The
    interviewing agents then challenged this statement by showing
    Clinton a work-related email that was not produced to the State
    Department. Clinton acknowledged that the email was work-related and
    stated that she did not know why her team did not produce it.
    [↩](#fnref112){.footnote-back}
    :::

113. ::: {#fn113}
    From the context of this message in the series of text messages that
    day, we determined that the text message was focused on the number
    of Midyear team members attending and not on the nature of the
    questioning. [↩](#fnref113){.footnote-back}
    :::

114. ::: {#fn114}
    We recognize that, as a general matter, a witness is free to consult
    with counsel of the witness's choice. However, the government is not
    required to agree to conduct an interview of a witness in the
    presence of counsel who is also a witness.
    [↩](#fnref114){.footnote-back}
    :::

115. ::: {#fn115}
    The legal framework for the Midyear investigation and the basis for
    the decision not to recommend or pursue prosecution of former
    Secretary Clinton or her staff are described in Chapters Two and
    Seven, respectively. Even though Section 793(f)(1) does not require
    intent, prosecutors told us that the Department has interpreted the
    provision to require that the person accused of having removed or
    delivered classified information in violation of this provision
    possess knowledge that the information is classified. In addition,
    based on the legislative history of Section 793(f)(1), the
    prosecutors determined that conduct must be "so gross as to almost
    suggest deliberate intention," be "criminally reckless," or fall
    "just a little short of willful" to meet the "gross negligence"
    standard. [↩](#fnref115){.footnote-back}
    :::

116. ::: {#fn116}
    COMEY*, supra*, at 164-65. [↩](#fnref116){.footnote-back}
    :::

117. ::: {#fn117}
    Comey served as the DAG from December 9, 2003, to August 15, 2005,
    under President George W. Bush. On July 14, 2003, the Washington
    Post published Plame's name, sourced to unidentified senior
    administration officials. On December 30, 2003, then Attorney
    General Ashcroft recused himself from the investigation. Comey
    became the Acting Attorney General for purposes of the investigation
    and appointed Fitzgerald to oversee it.
    [↩](#fnref117){.footnote-back}
    :::

118. ::: {#fn118}
    As discussed in Chapter Four, former President Obama made comments
    about the investigation in October 2015 and April 2016, while White
    House Press Secretary Josh Earnest made statements in January 2016
    suggesting that the Midyear investigation was not headed toward an
    indictment. [↩](#fnref118){.footnote-back}
    :::

119. ::: {#fn119}
    A defensive briefing is intended to warn government officials of
    specific security concerns or risks. As we describe in the
    classified appendix to this report, the Department discussed this
    information with career Department officials in March 2016, and
    later provided defensive briefings to Yates and Lynch on July 12,
    2016 and August 10, 2016, respectively.
    [↩](#fnref119){.footnote-back}
    :::

120. ::: {#fn120}
    In Section VI.C below, we describe Comey's testimony before the
    Senate Select

    Committee on Intelligence on June 8, 2017. During that testimony,
    Comey was asked whether Lynch had an appearance of a conflict of
    interest in the Midyear investigation. Comey replied, "I think
    that's fair. I didn't believe she could credibly decline that
    investigation---at least, not without grievous damage to the
    Department of Justice and to the FBI."
    [↩](#fnref120){.footnote-back}
    :::

121. ::: {#fn121}
    The Democratic National Convention was held from July 25 to
    28, 2016. Clinton was formally nominated to be the Democratic
    Party's Presidential nominee on July 26, and accepted the nomination
    on July 28, 2016. However, she secured a majority of delegates and
    became the presumptive nominee several weeks earlier, on June
    6, 2016. [↩](#fnref121){.footnote-back}
    :::

122. ::: {#fn122}
    On October 28, 2015, 44 Members of the House of Representatives sent
    a letter to Lynch requesting the appointment of a special counsel in
    the Midyear investigation, citing former President Obama's comments
    about the investigation on 60 Minutes as evidence that he had
    prejudged the investigation. The letter stated that a special
    counsel was warranted to ensure that the investigation was conducted
    free of undue bias from the White House. In addition, Senator
    Charles Grassley sent a letter to former Director Comey on May 17,
    2016, asking various questions, including whether Comey believed
    that a special counsel was necessary. [↩](#fnref122){.footnote-back}
    :::

123. ::: {#fn123}
    *See* Ruth Marcus, *What If Clinton Isn't Indicted?*, WASH. POST,
    Mar. 30, 2016, A17. [↩](#fnref123){.footnote-back}
    :::

124. ::: {#fn124}
    As discussed in Chapter Two, Department regulations at 28 C.F.R. §
    600.1 provide that the Attorney General, or in cases in which the
    Attorney General is recused, the Acting Attorney General, will
    appoint a Special Counsel when he or she determines that criminal
    investigation of a person or matter is warranted and (a) that
    investigation or prosecution of that person or matter by a United
    States Attorney's Office or litigating Division of the Department of
    Justice would present a conflict of interest for the Department or
    other extraordinary circumstances; and (b) that under the
    circumstances, it would be in the public interest to appoint an
    outside Special Counsel to assume responsibility for the matter.
    [↩](#fnref124){.footnote-back}
    :::

125. ::: {#fn125}
    Separately, on June 6, 2016, Priestap sent an email to McCabe and
    other providing input on the draft statement. In this email, he
    stated, "In my opinion, due to the election, this matter warrants
    the Director providing the American public an update. Ideally, this
    update would be provided as many weeks in advance of the National
    Conventions as is possible." When asked about this email, Priestap
    told the OIG that in his view the investigation had been
    politicized, and that former Secretary Clinton engendered strong
    feelings of support or dislike in some. He explained that he viewed
    it as the FBI's obligation to "let people know what was and was not
    found." [↩](#fnref125){.footnote-back}
    :::

126. ::: {#fn126}
    As set forth in Chapter Two, 18 U.S.C. § 1924 prohibits the knowing
    removal of documents or materials containing classified information
    without authority and with the intent to retain such documents or
    materials at an unauthorized location.
    [↩](#fnref126){.footnote-back}
    :::

127. ::: {#fn127}
    As described in Chapter Five, the LHM summarizing the Midyear
    investigation stated, "FBI investigation and forensic analysis did
    not find evidence confirming that Clinton's email server systems
    were compromised by cyber means." The LHM noted that the FBI
    identified one successful compromise of an account belonging to one
    of former President Clinton's staffers on a different domain within
    the same server that former Secretary Clinton used during her
    tenure, as well as compromises to email accounts belonging to
    certain people who communicated with Clinton by email, such as Jake
    Sullivan and Sidney Blumenthal. The FBI Forensics Agent who
    conducted the intrusion analysis told the OIG that, although he did
    not believe there was "any way of determining.100%" whether
    Clinton's servers had been compromised, he felt "fairly confident
    that there wasn't an intrusion." [↩](#fnref127){.footnote-back}
    :::

128. ::: {#fn128}
    The Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552a, prohibits an agency from
    disclosing a record about an individual to a person, or to another
    government agency, from a "system of records" absent the written
    consent of the individual, unless the disclosure is pursuant to a
    statutory exception. A system of records is a group of records under
    the control of an agency from which information is retrieved by the
    name of the individual or some other personal identifier assigned to
    the individual. Relevant information about an individual may be
    disclosed without consent under 12 statutory exceptions set forth in
    the Privacy Act, including one permitting "routine use" by the
    agency. *See* 5 U.S.C. § 552a(b)(3). One of the "routine uses"
    adopted by the FBI permits disclosure to "members of the general
    public in furtherance of a legitimate law enforcement or public
    safety function as determined by the FBI," for example, "to provide
    notification of arrests.or to keep the public appropriately
    informed of other law enforcement or FBI matters or other matters of
    legitimate public interest where disclosure could not reasonably be
    expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy."
    This includes the disclosure of information under 28 C.F.R. § 50.2,
    which governs the release of information about criminal and civil
    proceedings by Department personnel (including the FBI).
    [↩](#fnref128){.footnote-back}
    :::

129. ::: {#fn129}
    *See* Transcript, Press Conference of James Comey, CNN, June 1,
    2004, http://www.cnn.com/2004/LAW/06/01/comey.padilla.transcript
    (accessed May 1, 2018). Padilla was initially arrested on a material
    witness warrant in May 2002 but was then declared an enemy combatant
    by President Bush in June 2002 and transferred to military custody.
    Padilla was subsequently prosecuted by the Department in the
    civilian court system and in August 2007 a federal jury found him
    guilty of conspiring to commit murder and fund terrorism.
    [↩](#fnref129){.footnote-back}
    :::

130. ::: {#fn130}
    Under 28 C.F.R. § 50.2(b)(9), the permission of the Attorney General
    or the Deputy Attorney General is required "if a representative of
    the Department believes that in the interest of the fair
    administration of justice and the law enforcement process
    information beyond these guidelines should be released."
    [↩](#fnref130){.footnote-back}
    :::

131. ::: {#fn131}
    The Attorney General is required to travel on government aircraft
    for communications and security reasons, and used FBI and Department
    aircraft to do so. [↩](#fnref131){.footnote-back}
    :::

132. ::: {#fn132}
    On July 2, 2016, the head of Lynch's security detail sent an email
    to another agent in the FBI Security Division, stating, "I will
    explain the details later, but you know, we are not the final
    word as to who comes in or out of the AG's space. Her staff dropped
    the ball in a big way, and we were the easy scapegoats! I'm pretty
    pissed about the way things went down and how they were handled
    afterwards, needless to say I will be making some changes as to how
    much interaction we will have with this staff going forward." The
    OIG considered but decided not to interview the head of Lynch's FBI
    security detail because of concerns that requiring a member of the
    Attorney General's security detail to testify about what he observed
    in the course of conducting his official duties could impair the
    protective relationship and because the security concerns raised by
    the head of the security detail in his email were not a focus of
    this review. Further, we believed it was unlikely that the head of
    the security detail would have been in a position to be able to
    overhear the conversation between Lynch and former President
    Clinton. [↩](#fnref132){.footnote-back}
    :::

133. ::: {#fn133}
    Lynch was nominated by former President Clinton to be the U.S.
    Attorney for the Eastern District of New York, and served from June
    2, 1999 to May 2, 2001. Lynch served in the same position from May
    8, 2010 to April 27, 2015. [↩](#fnref133){.footnote-back}
    :::

134. ::: {#fn134}
    On June 23, 2016, voters in the United Kingdom approved a referendum
    to leave the European Union, a decision known as Brexit.
    [↩](#fnref134){.footnote-back}
    :::

135. ::: {#fn135}
    We asked Lynch about news reports that her security detail did not
    allow photos to be taken of the meeting. Lynch said that she did not
    recall any such discussions, but that it was her standard practice
    not to take photos with anyone involved in a campaign around an
    election. [↩](#fnref135){.footnote-back}
    :::

136. ::: {#fn136}
    After reviewing draft of the OIG's report, Newman clarified that
    "typically" no one talks to the AG without staff approval, and that
    she "assumed" that this typical practice was not followed because
    Clinton was a former president. [↩](#fnref136){.footnote-back}
    :::

137. ::: {#fn137}
    *See, e.g.*, Mark Landler *et al.*, *Loretta Lynch to Accept F.B.I.
    Recommendations in Clinton Email Inquiry*, N.Y. TIMES, Jul. 1, 2016;
    Joel B. Pollak, *Loretta Lynch's Non-Recusal Recusal*, BREITBART,
    Jul. 1, 2016. [↩](#fnref137){.footnote-back}
    :::

138. ::: {#fn138}
    Jonathan Capehart, *This Is What Loretta Lynch is Thinking Now*,
    WASH. POST, Jul. 5, 2016. [↩](#fnref138){.footnote-back}
    :::

139. ::: {#fn139}
    *See* U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Oversight and
    Government Reform, *Oversight of the State Department*, 114th Cong.,
    2d sess., July 7, 2016,
    https://oversight.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/7-7-2016-Oversight-of-the-StateDepartment.pdf
    (accessed May 8, 2018). [↩](#fnref139){.footnote-back}
    :::

140. ::: {#fn140}
    *See* U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on the Judiciary,
    *Oversight of the Federal Bureau of Investigation*, 114th Cong., 2d
    sess., September 28, 2016,
    https://judiciary.house.gov/wpcontent/uploads/2016/09/114-91\_22125.pdf
    (accessed May 8, 2018). [↩](#fnref140){.footnote-back}
    :::

141. ::: {#fn141}
    *See* U.S. Senate, Select Committee on Intelligence, *Open Hearing
    with Former FBI Director James Comey*, 115th Cong., 1st sess., June
    8, 2017,
    https://www.intelligence.senate.gov/hearings/open-hearing-former-fbi-director-james-comey\#
    (accessed May 8, 2018). [↩](#fnref141){.footnote-back}
    :::

142. ::: {#fn142}
    In an interview on September 8, 2015, former Secretary Clinton
    described the FBI's investigation as a "security investigation..
    It's not, as has been confirmed, a criminal investigation."
    Interview with Hillary Clinton, ABC News (Sept. 8, 2015),
    https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/fulltranscript-abcs-david-muir-interviews-hillary-clinton/story?id=33607656
    (accessed June 1, 2018). Her campaign also referred to it as a
    "security review." *See* Eugene Kiely, *More Spin on Clinton
    Emails*, FactCheck.org (Sept. 8, 2015),
    https://www.factcheck.org/2015/09/more-spin-on-clintonemails
    (accessed June 2, 2018). [↩](#fnref142){.footnote-back}
    :::

143. ::: {#fn143}
    As described in the classified appendix to this report, the FBI
    notified senior career Department officials about this information
    in March 2016, but did not convey that it raised concerns about
    Lynch's ability to credibly participate in announcing a declination
    in the Midyear investigation. [↩](#fnref143){.footnote-back}
    :::

144. ::: {#fn144}
    After reviewing a draft of the report, counsel for Comey stated that
    even before Lynch's July 1 statement that she would accept the
    recommendation of the career staff, the decision about whether to
    prosecute former Secretary Clinton was publicly framed as belonging
    to him, and Department leadership did not correct this impression.
    *See*, *e.g.*, Massimo Calabresi, *Inside the FBI*

    *Investigation of Hillary Clinton's Email*, TIME, Mar. 31, 2016
    (noting that Lynch testified in February 2016 that she was waiting
    for a charging recommendation from Comey, and that some Republicans
    were referring to the investigation as the "Comey primary"). As a
    result, counsel said that Comey did not "usurp" the Attorney
    General's authority, but rather had the role of the Attorney General
    given to him by Department leadership. However, waiting for a
    charging recommendation from the FBI Director is substantially
    different than making a public announcement without any prior
    consultation with or approval from the Attorney General. Indeed,
    there would have been no need for Comey to have affirmatively
    concealed his plans for a public statement from Lynch if he believed
    Lynch had effectively ceded authority over the prosecution decision
    to him. [↩](#fnref144){.footnote-back}
    :::

145. ::: {#fn145}
    Such a policy would necessarily need to include exceptions for
    certain situations where the law required or permitted disclosure.
    [↩](#fnref145){.footnote-back}
    :::

146. ::: {#fn146}
    A redacted version of the LHM is publicly available on the FBI's
    website. *See* FBI Records: The Vault, Hillary R. Clinton, Part 1,
    https://vault.fbi.gov/hillary-r.-clinton (accessed March 6, 2018).
    [↩](#fnref146){.footnote-back}
    :::

147. ::: {#fn147}
    On July 8, 2016, following Comey's congressional testimony about the
    Midyear investigation described in Chapter Six, Prosecutor 3 emailed
    Strzok and Prosecutors 1, 2, and 4 and stated the following:

    One thing that was apparent just from the highlights of the
    Committee hearings that I saw last night was the fact that the
    Director's statements about the number and levels of classified
    documents found are being used by the Hill and others to claim
    that Clinton was lying when she has said in the past that she
    never sent or received classified information. What undercuts
    the ability to prove intent in support of a false statement charge
    is that when Clinton made these statements she didn't have the
    benefit of later findings by those who did the classification
    reviews and of course there weren't the classification markings on
    the emails to put her on notice, and give us the ability to prove,
    that she was lying. This never seemed to get discussed or emphasized
    in the clips I saw last night. [↩](#fnref147){.footnote-back}
    :::

148. ::: {#fn148}
    As noted above, even the handful of emails in which some paragraphs
    were marked "(C)" did not bear the required classification headers
    or footers, and Clinton testified that she did not recognize these
    paragraph markings as denoting classified information.
    [↩](#fnref148){.footnote-back}
    :::

149. ::: {#fn149}
    For example, during the presidential debate on Sunday, October 9,
    2016, and at a campaign rally two days later, then candidate Trump,
    among other things, criticized the outcome of the investigation of
    Clinton. [↩](#fnref149){.footnote-back}
    :::

150. ::: {#fn150}
    After reviewing a draft of the report, Page asked the OIG to clarify
    that she did not draft the talking points, but was the conduit
    through which they were distributed. [↩](#fnref150){.footnote-back}
    :::

151. ::: {#fn151}
    Based on the content of emails and the timing, we believe "the
    recent email story from Fox" refers to an October 13, 2016 article
    on Fox News entitled, "FBI, DOJ roiled by Comey, Lynch decision to
    let Clinton slide by on emails, says insider." *See* Malia Zimmerman
    and Adam Housley, *FBI, DOJ Roiled by Comey, Lynch Decision to Let
    Clinton Slide by on Emails, Says Insider*, FOX NEWS, Oct. 13, 2016.
    [↩](#fnref151){.footnote-back}
    :::

152. ::: {#fn152}
    No electronic record exists of the case agent's initial review of
    the Weiner laptop. The case agent told us that at some point in
    mid-October 2016 the NYO ASAC instructed the case agent to wipe his
    work station. The case agent explained that the ASAC was concerned
    about the presence of potentially classified information on the case
    agent's work station, which was not authorized to process classified
    information. The case agent told us that he followed the ASAC's
    instructions, but that this request concerned him because the audit
    trail of his initial processing of the laptop would no longer be
    available. The case agent clarified that none of the evidence on the
    Weiner laptop was impacted by this, explaining that the FBI retained
    the Weiner laptop and only the image that had been copied onto his
    work station was deleted. The ASAC recalled that the case agent
    "worked through the security department to address the concern" of
    classified information on an unclassified system. He told us that he
    did not recall how the issue was resolved.
    [↩](#fnref152){.footnote-back}
    :::

153. ::: {#fn153}
    As noted in Chapter Eight, McCabe held a meeting on the afternoon of
    September 29 entitled "Mtg. w/DD RE Decision Points" that Rybicki,
    Anderson, Strzok, Page, FBI Attorney 1, Baker, and Priestap were
    invited to attend. Contemporaneous notes from the meeting reflected
    a discussion of congressional requests for materials from the
    Midyear investigation. The notes did not reference the NYO call.
    [↩](#fnref153){.footnote-back}
    :::

154. ::: {#fn154}
    In McCabe's absence, Bowdich as ADD would run the daily update
    meeting. [↩](#fnref154){.footnote-back}
    :::

155. ::: {#fn155}
    Priestap further explained his thought process at the time, noting
    that he considered the Weiner laptop to be an important issue when
    first informed about it on September 28 and made sure it received
    his immediate attention. However, Priestap told us that once he was
    informed of potential legal and technical issues regarding the
    laptop, he believed from past experience that those issues would
    take time to resolve and therefore expected no immediate update.
    [↩](#fnref155){.footnote-back}
    :::

156. ::: {#fn156}
    As noted in Chapter Five, the 30,490 emails provided by Clinton's
    attorneys contained no emails sent or received by Clinton during the
    first two months of her tenure, January 21, 2009, through March 18,
    2009, and the FBI investigative team was unable to locate the
    BlackBerry device she used during that time, although they were able
    to obtain some of the BlackBerry emails from other sources.
    Witnesses, including former Director Comey, told us that they
    believed these missing emails could contain important evidence
    regarding Clinton's intent in setting up a private email server.
    [↩](#fnref156){.footnote-back}
    :::

157. ::: {#fn157}
    "Data carving" is typically the last phase of processing an
    electronic device and involves recovering files and data that have
    been either deleted or no longer contain complete metadata.
    [↩](#fnref157){.footnote-back}
    :::

158. ::: {#fn158}
    Axelrod also recalled hearing about the Weiner laptop issue at some
    point prior to this call.

    He told us that he thought SDNY had called the ADAG at an earlier
    point to inform ODAG that some of [↩](#fnref158){.footnote-back}
    :::

159. ::: {#fn159}
    After reviewing a draft of the report, Toscas asked that the OIG
    clarify that he was not involved in the investigation of the Clinton
    Foundation. [↩](#fnref159){.footnote-back}
    :::

160. ::: {#fn160}
    The day before, Sunday, October 23, the Wall Street Journal
    published online its story about McCabe's wife and her prior run for
    elective office in Virginia in 2015, including donations to her
    campaign by entities connected to then Governor McAuliffe. The story
    raised questions about

    McCabe's participation in Clinton-related investigations, which we
    discuss in detail in Chapter Thirteen.
    [↩](#fnref160){.footnote-back}
    :::

161. ::: {#fn161}
    According to both Comey and McCabe's Outlook calendars, they met at
    9:30 a.m. on Monday, October 24 for a "Weekly Update." Rybicki was
    also scheduled to attend this meeting. Their calendars showed that
    this meeting occurred immediately after the Monday morning briefing
    for the Attorney General where we believe Toscas and McCabe spoke.
    Neither Comey nor McCabe said that they recalled any discussion of
    the Weiner laptop at this 9:30 a.m. meeting.
    [↩](#fnref161){.footnote-back}
    :::

162. ::: {#fn162}
    Sweeney told us that he did not recall Bowdich participating in this
    discussion despite the "ADD" notation in his calendar. Bowdich
    likewise told us he did not recall this discussion.
    [↩](#fnref162){.footnote-back}
    :::

163. ::: {#fn163}
    Except for the September 29 call with NYO, the Midyear case agents
    and analysts had limited knowledge of and involvement with the
    Weiner laptop until after Comey's October 28 letter to Congress. Our
    references to the "FBI Midyear team" in this Chapter generally refer
    to the leadership of the team, including Strzok, the Midyear SSA,
    and FBI Attorney 1. [↩](#fnref163){.footnote-back}
    :::

164. ::: {#fn164}
    In comments provided to the OIG after reviewing a draft of this
    report, the Lead Analyst stated that he believed the October 26 call
    "was the first time he had ever personally heard the details
    related to the" Weiner laptop. [↩](#fnref164){.footnote-back}
    :::

165. ::: {#fn165}
    Although Comey identified this fact as critical to his assessment of
    the potential significance of the emails on the Weiner laptop, the
    information was not included in the October 30 search warrant
    application for the Weiner laptop. [↩](#fnref165){.footnote-back}
    :::

166. ::: {#fn166}
    We found that McCabe called NSD Principal DAAG McCord on October 3
    and flagged the issue of emails in an iCloud account shared by
    Abedin and Weiner. However, McCord told us, and her contemporaneous
    notes indicated, that McCabe provided minimal information about this
    issue, and did not mention the potential presence of emails between
    Abedin and Clinton on Weiner's laptop. We identified no other FBI
    Headquarters or Midyear personnel communications with the Department
    about the Weiner investigation---and no communications about the
    presence of Midyear-related emails on the Weiner laptop---until
    October 21. [↩](#fnref166){.footnote-back}
    :::

167. ::: {#fn167}
    As discussed in Chapter Thirteen, Comey asked McCabe to drop out of
    the discussion about this topic on October 27, and Page left the
    discussion as well. McCabe formally recused himself from
    Clinton-related matters on November 1.
    [↩](#fnref167){.footnote-back}
    :::

168. ::: {#fn168}
    In his book, Comey stated that after he received the Department's
    feedback, "I briefly toyed with the idea of communicating to them
    that I had decided not to tell Congress, just to see what they would
    do if I shifted the responsibility entirely to them, but decided
    that would be cowardly and stupid. Once again it became my
    responsibility to take the hit." COMEY*, supra*, at 197.
    [↩](#fnref168){.footnote-back}
    :::

169. ::: {#fn169}
    COMEY*, supra*, at 200-01. [↩](#fnref169){.footnote-back}
    :::

170. ::: {#fn170}
    In his book, Comey stated, with respect to the July declination,
    that "no fair-minded person with any experience in the
    counterespionage world (where 'spills' of classified information are
    investigated and prosecuted) could think this was a case the career
    prosecutors at the Department of Justice might pursue. There was
    literally zero chance of that." COMEY*, supra*, at 185.
    [↩](#fnref170){.footnote-back}
    :::

171. ::: {#fn171}
    As noted above, after reviewing a draft of this report, Toscas and
    others noted that SDNY played no substantive role in the October 30
    search warrant. [↩](#fnref171){.footnote-back}
    :::

172. ::: {#fn172}
    In comments provided to the OIG after reviewing a draft of this
    report, Baker stated that he "had not played a significant role, if
    any, in scoping the prior consent agreements or legal process used
    to obtain other emails in the investigation." Baker continued,
    "Given the intense focus on the Weiner laptop, Baker said he
    looked more closely at this warrant application and asked what
    he thought were logical questions." Ultimately, Baker stated
    that he "deferred to DOJ on whether there was probable cause to
    support the seizure of additional emails."
    [↩](#fnref172){.footnote-back}
    :::

173. ::: {#fn173}
    A BlackBerry backup is a file, typically found on a personal
    computer, containing data from a BlackBerry handheld device. The
    BlackBerry backup can include data from the handheld device's
    address book, calendar, browser, email, SMS and MMS messages, phone
    call logs and history, as well as pictures and other media stored on
    the on-board media storage. At the time the backup is created, the
    user can configure the specific items to be saved. As a result, not
    all of the above items may be found in every backup.
    [↩](#fnref173){.footnote-back}
    :::

174. ::: {#fn174}
    The FBI did not determine exactly how Abedin's emails came to reside
    on Weiner's laptop. Analyst 2 told us that it appeared that Abedin's
    personal devices had been backed up on the laptop at various points
    in time. Documents we reviewed indicated that Abedin told the FBI
    that she did not know how or why this occurred.
    [↩](#fnref174){.footnote-back}
    :::

175. ::: {#fn175}
    FBINet is the FBI's computer system for information classified at
    the Secret level, while its SCINet system handles Top Secret and
    compartmented information. [↩](#fnref175){.footnote-back}
    :::

176. ::: {#fn176}
    After reviewing a draft of this report, the Midyear prosecutors told
    the OIG that they did not use text messages, and that the only text
    messages they received were from the Midyear agents about logistical
    arrangements. [↩](#fnref176){.footnote-back}
    :::

177. ::: {#fn177}
    In March 2015, the OIG issued a report pertaining to the handling of
    sexual harassment allegations by the Department's four law
    enforcement components, the FBI, the Drug Enforcement Administration
    (DEA), the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives
    (ATF), and the U.S. Marshal's Service (USMS). In that report, we
    noted that all four components had weaknesses detecting sexually
    explicit text messages and images, and that two components did not
    archive text messages sent and received by its employees. We
    therefore recommended that all four law enforcement components, in
    coordination with ODAG, should (1) acquire and implement technology
    and establish procedures to effectively preserve text messages and
    images for a reasonable period of time, and should make that
    information available to misconduct investigators and for discovery
    purposes; and (2) take concrete steps to acquire and implement
    technology to proactively monitor text message and image data for
    potential misconduct. *See* U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) Office
    of the Inspector General (OIG), *The Handling of Sexual Harassment
    and Misconduct Allegations by the Department's Law Enforcement
    Components*, Evaluation and Inspections Division Report 15-04 (March
    2016), https://go.usa.gov/xQGz4 (accessed May 9, 2018).
    [↩](#fnref177){.footnote-back}
    :::

178. ::: {#fn178}
    We identified other text messages and instant messages in which FBI
    employees involved in the Midyear investigation discussed political
    issues and candidates. This Chapter does not include a discussion of
    every political text message or instant message that we identified.
    Instead, we discuss only those messages that we found raised the
    most significant questions of potential bias or improper motivation
    based on their content, timing, or the individuals involved.
    [↩](#fnref178){.footnote-back}
    :::

179. ::: {#fn179}
    On March 20, 2017, then Director Comey testified before Congress
    that the FBI began an investigation in late July 2016 into "the
    Russian government's efforts to interfere in the 2016 presidential
    election," including "investigating the nature of any links between
    individuals associated with the Trump campaign and the Russian
    government and whether there was any coordination between the
    campaign and Russia's efforts." [↩](#fnref179){.footnote-back}
    :::

180. ::: {#fn180}
    Supervision of the Russia investigation was briefly transitioned
    from Strzok to another Counterintelligence Division DAD in
    early 2017. However, AD Priestap told us that FBI leadership decided
    to keep Strzok involved in the Russia investigation and he was
    therefore reassigned back to it. [↩](#fnref180){.footnote-back}
    :::

181. ::: {#fn181}
    The FBI produced 73,900 text messages between Strzok and Page from
    the period June [↩](#fnref181){.footnote-back}
    :::

182. ::: {#fn182}
    , 2015, to December 1, 2016; 1,368 text messages from the period
    December 1 to December 14, 2016; and 2,054 text messages from the
    period May 18 to July 1, 2017. However, these included significant
    numbers of duplicates. We estimate that the number of unique text
    messages exchanged between Strzok and Page exceeded 40,000. The FBI
    pulled the majority of these text messages from Page's archives, as
    Strzok's text messages were not consistently preserved due to
    compatibility problems between the FBI's text message preservation
    software and the Samsung S5 cell phones used by the FBI. Issues
    related to the preservation of text messages affected a large number
    of FBI employees, and OIG forensic agents determined that the
    failure to preserve Strzok's text messages resulted from this
    compatibility issue, not from the actions of any FBI employee,
    including Strzok. Text message preservation resumed in May 2017,
    after Page received a Samsung S7 phone.
    [↩](#fnref182){.footnote-back}
    :::

183. ::: {#fn183}
    The OIG is preparing a separate report on its text message recovery
    efforts and findings. [↩](#fnref183){.footnote-back}
    :::

184. ::: {#fn184}
    This Chapter includes the text messages we found most relevant to
    our review. However, Page and Strzok sent other text messages about
    candidates and issues involved in the 2016 presidential election,
    unrelated to the Midyear or Russia investigations, and also sent
    numerous text messages, both positive and negative, about other
    public and government officials from both political parties. These
    included former Maryland Governor Martin O'Malley ("And Martin
    O'Malley's a douche," October 14, 2015), Congressman Paul Ryan ("And
    I hope Paul Ryan fails and crashes in a blaze of glory," November 1,
    2015), Ohio Governor John Kasich ("Poor Kasich. He\'s the only
    sensible man up there," "Exactly re Kasich. And he has ZERO appeal,"
    March 4, 2016), former Attorney General Eric Holder ("Oh God,
    Holder! Turn the television off turn it off turn it off!!!!"
    "Yeah, I saw him yesterday and booed at the tv," July 27, 2016), and
    others. Page and Strzok told us that these additional text messages
    were relevant because they reflected that Trump was not singled out
    by them for criticism or criticized for partisan reasons.
    [↩](#fnref184){.footnote-back}
    :::

185. ::: {#fn185}
    All text messages produced to the OIG reflected Greenwich Mean Time.
    As a result, some text messages sent late at night bore the wrong
    date. We have corrected times and, where necessary, dates in this
    report to reflect the Eastern Time Zone. In addition, some text
    messages used emojis and other formatting symbols, which we omitted
    unless they affected the meaning of the text message. We also
    excluded other intervening text messages that did not contribute to
    understanding the highlighted text messages.
    [↩](#fnref185){.footnote-back}
    :::

186. ::: {#fn186}
    Among the text messages forensically recovered by the OIG in May
    2018 was another exchange about "All the President's Men." On March
    14, 2017, Page texted, "Finally two pages away from finishing atpm.
    Did you know the president resigns in the end?! " Strzok replied,
    "What?!?!

    God, that we should be so lucky." [↩](#fnref186){.footnote-back}
    :::

187. ::: {#fn187}
    Although we received Page's August 8 text message to Strzok from the
    FBI as part of its production of text messages in 2017, Strzok's
    response to Page was not among those preserved by the FBI's text
    message preservation software, and therefore was not produced to us.
    The OIG's Cyber Investigations Office recovered this text message,
    along with others, in May 2018 through forensic analysis of a folder
    found on Page's and Strzok's Samsung S5 devices.
    [↩](#fnref187){.footnote-back}
    :::

188. ::: {#fn188}
    Strzok expressed similar sentiments in an email to Page using his
    FBI UNET (unclassified) account. On May 22, 2017, at a time when
    Page was working for the Special Counsel but Strzok had not yet
    joined the Special Counsel investigation, Page forwarded Strzok a
    Washington Post article entitled, "Trump asked intelligence chiefs
    to push back against FBI collusion probe after Comey revealed its
    existence." Strzok responded saying, "Yup. Assuming you/team will do
    it via Mueller?" When Page confirmed this, Strzok responded, "God I
    suddenly want on this. You know why." Page replied that she would
    leave the Special Counsel investigation and "happily" return to her
    work at the FBI if Strzok really wanted to join the investigation.
    Strzok responded, "I'm torn. I think -- know -- I'm more replaceable
    than you are in this. I'm the best for it, but there are others who
    can do OK.

    You are different and more unique. This is yours. Plus, leaving a
    Special Counsel (having been an

    SC) resulting in an impeachment as an attorney is VERY different
    than leaving as an investigator.." [↩](#fnref188){.footnote-back}
    :::

189. ::: {#fn189}
    Strzok gave a similar explanation for the email he sent to Page
    referencing a Special Counsel investigation "resulting in an
    impeachment." He stated, "While it says that, I think my sense
    was very much, you know, where it could result in an impeachment. I
    am, again, was not, am not convinced or certain that it will.."
    [↩](#fnref189){.footnote-back}
    :::

190. ::: {#fn190}
    All instant messages produced to the OIG reflected Greenwich Mean
    Time. We have corrected times to the Eastern Time Zone as a result.
    In addition, some instant messages contained emojis, which we
    omitted unless they affected the meaning of the message. We also do
    not include other intervening instant messages unless they
    contribute to understanding the highlighted messages.
    [↩](#fnref190){.footnote-back}
    :::

191. ::: {#fn191}
    The symbol used in these messages is a "sick face" emoticon. *See*
    IM Emoticons, *at* http://sheet.shiar.nl/emoji (last accessed April
    28, 2018). [↩](#fnref191){.footnote-back}
    :::

192. ::: {#fn192}
    Agent 1 explained the reason for his belief that the instant
    messages were not retained, stating, "So my understanding of
    instant messaging in the FBI is that it was implemented about
    four or five years ago, roughly. Because I did internal
    investigations, at the time I was on the espionage
    [↩](#fnref192){.footnote-back}
    :::

193. ::: {#fn193}
    After reviewing a draft of the report, Page told the OIG that the
    Samsung phones used by the FBI do not include any such warning
    banner. The OIG confirmed with the FBI that this is accurate.
    However, the notice on the FBI's computer system applies to "all
    devices or storage media attached to this network or to a
    computer on this network," and alerts users that they "have no
    reasonable expectation of privacy regarding any communication
    transmitted through or data stored on this information system. At
    any time the government may monitor, intercept, search and/or seize
    data transmitted through or data stored on this information system."
    In addition, a recent Department training stated, "DOJ systems are
    not your personal systems. That means you have no reasonable
    expectation of privacy about maintaining any personal information,
    data, or applications on Department systems, networks, or devices."
    Department of Justice, Office of the Chief Information Officer, 2018
    Annual DOJ Cybersecurity Awareness Training, at 14.
    [↩](#fnref193){.footnote-back}
    :::

194. ::: {#fn194}
    For example, FBI Records Management Training warns FBI employees to
    be careful about what they say in emails and text messages:

    Remember, that emails and texts messages should be treated the same
    way as paper correspondence. So be aware of what you write. It may
    be released through FOIA, and be made widely available one day.

    Of course, many of our records also end up in court. In civil cases,
    the FBI must turn over all relevant evidence, including emails and
    text messages. While all documents are viewed for privilege and
    redacted prior to release, there is no claim of privilege covering
    inappropriate or embarrassing statements. Such as, the governor is a
    block [↩](#fnref194){.footnote-back}
    :::

195. ::: {#fn195}
    The Supreme Court has held that public employees do not forfeit
    their right to freedom of speech by virtue of their public
    employment. *See Pickering* v. *Bd. of Educ.*, 391 U.S. 563, 568
    (1968). However, when a citizen enters government service, he
    accepts certain limitations on his First Amendment rights. *See
    Garcetti* v. *Ceballos*, 547 U.S. 410, 418 (2006). In *Pickering*,
    the Supreme Court recognized that a public employer has an interest
    in regulating the speech of its employees. The Court strove to
    "arrive at a balance between the interests of the public
    employee, as a citizen, in commenting upon matters of public
    concern and the interest of the State, as an employer in promoting
    the efficiency of the public services it performs through its
    employees." To strike this balance, the Supreme Court has set forth
    a two-step inquiry to determine whether a public employee's speech
    is entitled to protection. *See Lane* v. *Franks*, 134 S.Ct. 2369,
    2378 (2014). First, the court must determine the threshold question
    of whether the employee spoke as a private citizen on a matter of
    public concern. *See Garcetti*, 547 U.S. at 418. If not, the
    employee has no First Amendment claim. If so, the second step is to
    establish "whether the relevant government entity had an adequate
    justification for treating the employee differently from any other
    member of the general public." *Id.* [↩](#fnref195){.footnote-back}
    :::

196. ::: {#fn196}
    These messages may also implicate other Department-wide Rules, such
    as Department of Justice Information Technology Security Rules of
    Behavior for General Users Version 10 (January 1, 2017).
    [↩](#fnref196){.footnote-back}
    :::

197. ::: {#fn197}
    In 2012, "racy texts" exchanged between two FBI agents and an FBI
    informant were used to impeach the agents in the prosecutions of
    several defendants for violations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices
    Act. According to a Washington Post article about the case, which
    ended without convictions, the foreman of the jury stated that the
    "texts were one of many things that pointed to an absolutely
    amateurish operation" by the government. *See* Del Quentin Wilbur,
    *Racy Texts Hurt Justice's Largest Sting Operation Targeting Foreign
    Bribery*, WASH. POST, Feb. 13, 2013. This case and the Washington
    Post article about the impact of the text messages are used in the
    Department's training on electronic discovery as an example of what
    not to say in text messages. However, the OIG learned that the
    agents involved in that case were not investigated or disciplined
    for misconduct, and that their text messages were handled as a
    performance issue. Both agents remain employed by the FBI.
    [↩](#fnref197){.footnote-back}
    :::

198. ::: {#fn198}
    This refers to the federal agency responsible for investigating
    violations of the Hatch Act, not to Special Counsel Robert
    Mueller III. [↩](#fnref198){.footnote-back}
    :::

199. ::: {#fn199}
    The OIG previously notified the respective U.S. Attorney's Offices
    about Strzok's actions. [↩](#fnref199){.footnote-back}
    :::

200. ::: {#fn200}
    We requested access to Strzok's personal email account. Strzok
    agreed to produce copies of work-related emails in his personal
    account but declined to produce copies of his personal emails.
    Strzok subsequently told the OIG that he had reviewed the emails
    residing in his personal mailboxes and found no work-related
    communications. We determined that we lacked legal authority to
    obtain the contents of Strzok's personal email account from his
    email provider, which requires an Electronic

    Communications Privacy Act (ECPA) search warrant to produce email
    contents. Strzok's email [↩](#fnref200){.footnote-back}
    :::

201. ::: {#fn201}
    U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) Office of the Inspector General
    (OIG), *Report of Investigation of Certain Allegations Relating to
    Former FBI Deputy Director Andrew McCabe,* Oversight & Review Report
    (February 2018), https://oig.justice.gov/reports/2018/o20180413.pdf
    (accessed May 14, 2018). [↩](#fnref201){.footnote-back}
    :::

202. ::: {#fn202}
    One of those investigations led to INSD raising questions about
    McCabe's conduct and resulted in the OIG taking over the matter from
    INSD. Ultimately, the OIG found that McCabe himself had authorized
    others in the FBI to disclose information regarding the FBI's
    Clinton Foundation investigation just days prior to the election.
    [↩](#fnref202){.footnote-back}
    :::

203. ::: {#fn203}
    The Media Policy in effect both at the time of these events and
    currently authorizes only four employees at FBI Headquarters to
    speak directly to the media without prior authorization. This list
    includes the Director, Deputy Director, Associate Deputy Director,
    and the Assistant Director of the Office of Public Affairs (OPA).
    All other headquarters employees are required to coordinate with OPA
    prior to any contact with the media. In FBI Field Offices (FO), only
    the head of the FO and a designated Public Affairs Officer are
    authorized to speak to the media. The policies require these
    authorized FO officials to coordinate with OPA on stories with
    national interest. [↩](#fnref203){.footnote-back}
    :::

204. ::: {#fn204}
    These charts do not reflect communications that occurred between
    media representatives and FBI employees who were working in a public
    affairs capacity or were otherwise authorized to speak directly to
    the media. [↩](#fnref204){.footnote-back}
    :::

205. ::: {#fn205}
    This chapter has been written to avoid reference to Law Enforcement
    Sensitive (LES) information. Attached to this report at Appendix Two
    is a non-public LES appendix containing the complete, unmodified
    version of Chapter Thirteen. [↩](#fnref205){.footnote-back}
    :::

206. ::: {#fn206}
    The OIG's review focused on McCabe's conflict of interest
    obligations. Other allegations against McCabe arising from his
    wife's 2015 campaign for state senate were not within the OIG's
    jurisdiction and therefore not within the scope of this review.
    Specifically, in a December 1, 2017, letter to Deputy Attorney
    General Rosenstein, Senator Charles Grassley expressed concern that

    McCabe may have violated the Hatch Act. *See* The Honorable Charles
    Grassley, letter to Rod Rosenstein, Deputy Attorney General, U.S.
    Department of Justice, December 1, 2017. The Hatch Act generally
    governs the political activity of federal employees to protect the
    federal workforce from partisan political influence. The law's
    restrictions on political activity are codified at 5 U.S.C.
    §§ 73217326. The U.S. Office of Special Counsel (OSC) has
    jurisdiction over potential Hatch Act violations.
    [↩](#fnref206){.footnote-back}
    :::

207. ::: {#fn207}
    The "reasonable person" standard is also the test for the general
    appearance principle in section 101 referenced above. 5 C.F.R. §
    2635.101(b)(14) ("Whether particular circumstances create an
    appearance that the law or these standards have been violated shall
    be determined from the perspective of a reasonable person with
    knowledge of the relevant facts."). [↩](#fnref207){.footnote-back}
    :::

208. ::: {#fn208}
    Ethics determinations for the Director are made by the Deputy
    Attorney General. *See* DOJ Order 1200.1 at part 11, chapter 11-1,
    C2.1. [↩](#fnref208){.footnote-back}
    :::

209. ::: {#fn209}
    *See* U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) Office of the Inspector
    General (OIG), *A Report of Investigation of Certain Allegations
    Relating to Former FBI Deputy Director Andrew McCabe*, Oversight and
    Review Division (February 2018). [↩](#fnref209){.footnote-back}
    :::

210. ::: {#fn210}
    McCabe said he did not remember what the unrelated event was about.
    [↩](#fnref210){.footnote-back}
    :::

211. ::: {#fn211}
    The FBI also stated in the letter that McCabe's campaign activities
    were permissible under the Hatch Act. We discuss the FBI's
    Congressional responses in further detail below.
    [↩](#fnref211){.footnote-back}
    :::

212. ::: {#fn212}
    *See* Jim Nolan, *Clinton Rouses Virginia Democrats at Party
    Fundraiser at GMU*, RICHMOND TIMES-DISPATCH, Jun. 27, 2015, 2015
    WLNR 19664828; Patrick Wilson, *Clinton Makes Her First*

    *Campaign Appearance in Virginia*, THE VIRGINIAN-PILOT, Jun. 27,
    2015, 2015 WLNR 18860380; Rachel Weiner, *At George Mason Arena,
    Clinton Goes on the Attack*, WASH. POST, Jun. 28, 2015, 2015
    WLNR 18937709. [↩](#fnref212){.footnote-back}
    :::

213. ::: {#fn213}
    Clinton also appeared with Governor McAuliffe at a campaign rally in
    Alexandria, Virginia on October 23, 2015. Laura Vozzella, *Clinton
    Stirs Up Crowd in Alexandria, Va., at Afternoon Rally*, WASH. POST,
    Oct. 23, 2015,
    https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/postpolitics/wp/2015/10/23/clinton-stirs-up-crowd-in-alexandria-va-at-afternoon-rally
    (accessed March 27, 2018). McCabe also told us that neither he nor
    his wife attended this event. [↩](#fnref213){.footnote-back}
    :::

214. ::: {#fn214}
    A-CDC told us she drafted the EC on her own and did not coordinate
    the writing of the EC with Kelley or any others in OIC or OGC. A-CDC
    said McCabe was the approving official on the EC because he was her
    direct supervisor. When we asked Kelley whether McCabe's supervisor
    or some other official should have approved the EC given that its
    subject matter was about his recusal, he said he believed it was
    "fine" for McCabe to approve it and make a record of the recusal in
    the system. Kelley provided two reasons. First, he said the EC work
    flow process requires a supervisor to approve its creation and
    McCabe is A-CDC's supervisor. Second, he said that substantively the
    EC does not so much reflect on the decision to recuse as it
    describes the administrative measures that would be taken to
    implement the recusal protocols. [↩](#fnref214){.footnote-back}
    :::

215. ::: {#fn215}
    McCabe told us that when he was ADD and Deputy Director Giuliano was
    absent, McCabe filled in for him at meetings, although McCabe said
    he did not recollect doing so at any meetings related to the Clinton
    email investigation. Giuliano also told us that for a period of
    about two weeks before he departed the FBI and McCabe became the
    Deputy Director, McCabe shadowed Giuliano and he coached McCabe as
    he took over his new position. [↩](#fnref215){.footnote-back}
    :::

216. ::: {#fn216}
    The "played no role" reference in the FBI statement was derived from
    information provided by McCabe and was approved in advance by
    McCabe. Soon after publication of the October 23 WSJ article, the
    "played no role" statement came under public criticism.
    Subsequently, in its December 14 letter to Senator Grassley
    (described below) relating to alleged conflict of interest issues
    involving McCabe, the FBI removed the "played no role" language from
    a draft of the letter and instead stated in its final letter: "To
    the best of his recollection, Mr. McCabe's only activities related
    in any way to the campaign included providing transportation to his
    spouse in their personal vehicle on two occasions to public events;
    attending one public debate as a spectator; and appearing in a
    family photo which was used in a campaign mailer, all of which are
    permissible under the Hatch Act." [↩](#fnref216){.footnote-back}
    :::

217. ::: {#fn217}
    Comey told us he did not recall his weighing in on whether McCabe
    should recuse from the Clinton Foundation investigation and said he
    did not remember knowing that McCabe ultimately recused from the
    Clinton Foundation investigation at the same time he recused from
    the Clinton email investigation. [↩](#fnref217){.footnote-back}
    :::

218. ::: {#fn218}
    McCabe and Page both told us that neither of them spoke directly to
    Kelley about Clinton matter recusals in October 2016, but wished
    they had because they would learn in 2017 that Kelley's view was the
    same as theirs --- that there was no basis in fact or law that
    required McCabe to recuse from the Clinton matters.
    [↩](#fnref218){.footnote-back}
    :::

219. ::: {#fn219}
    *See* Devlin Barrett and Christopher Matthews, *Secret Recordings
    Fueled FBI Feud in Clinton Probe*, WALL ST. J., Nov. 3, 2016,
    https://www.wsj.com/articles/secret-recordings-fueled-fbifeud-in-clinton-probe-1478135518
    (accessed June 11, 2018). [↩](#fnref219){.footnote-back}
    :::

220. ::: {#fn220}
    As detailed in a separate OIG misconduct report, McCabe had himself
    authorized the disclosure of sensitive information about the Clinton
    Foundation investigation to the Wall Street Journal, which was
    included in an article published on October 30 as well as in the
    November 3 article he discussed with Sweeney.
    [↩](#fnref220){.footnote-back}
    :::

221. ::: {#fn221}
    As noted above, McCabe told us that neither he nor his wife attended
    the June 2015 fundraiser in Virginia and that he was unaware that
    the Clintons or anyone on their behalf ever contributed to Dr.
    McCabe's campaign. He said neither he nor his wife have ever met the
    Clintons. [↩](#fnref221){.footnote-back}
    :::

222. ::: {#fn222}
    In March 2017, news accounts reported allegations that McCabe failed
    to disclose in his Public Financial Disclosure Report (OGE Form
    278e) for 2016, the amount of salary his wife received from her
    employer and the campaign donations she received in 2015. However,
    such disclosures are not required by OGE Form 278e. First, the OGE
    regulation addressing the financial disclosure report expressly
    states that the report does not need to disclose the amount of the
    spouse's income. *See* 5 C.F.R. § 2634.309(1). Second, according to
    the OGE regulations, while campaign funds need not be included in
    the financial disclosure report "if the individual has authority to
    exercise control over the fund\'s assets for personal use rather
    than campaign or political purposes, that portion of the fund over
    which such authority exists must be reported." 5 C.F.R. §
    2634.311(a). However, the OGE regulations do not require reporting
    gifts that are received by a spouse "totally independent" of the
    spouse's relationship to the filer. 5 C.F.R. § 2634.309(a)(2). While
    we did not investigate individual donations to Dr. McCabe's campaign
    committee, during our review we did not find evidence suggesting
    that Dr. McCabe received campaign donations because of McCabe.
    [↩](#fnref222){.footnote-back}
    :::

223. ::: {#fn223}
    The Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended, does not provide the
    OIG with the authority to compel non-Department employees to
    participate in interviews. [↩](#fnref223){.footnote-back}
    :::

224. ::: {#fn224}
    We have anonymized Kadzik's wife and son by giving them initials as
    pseudonyms. We refer to Kadzik's wife as "LM" and his son as "RS."
    [↩](#fnref224){.footnote-back}
    :::

225. ::: {#fn225}
    The Office of Public Affairs is the Department's principal point of
    contact for the news media. [↩](#fnref225){.footnote-back}
    :::

226. ::: {#fn226}
    The Ethics Agreement was signed by Kadzik and Lee Lofthus, the AAG
    for Administration and the Department's Designated Ethics Official,
    and sent to the Director of Office of Government Ethics (OGE).
    [↩](#fnref226){.footnote-back}
    :::

227. ::: {#fn227}
    Emails show that Kadzik coordinated his recusal memorandum with
    OLA's DDAEO. The individual who served as OLA's DDAEO under Kadzik
    has since retired from the Department and declined our requests for
    an interview. [↩](#fnref227){.footnote-back}
    :::

228. ::: {#fn228}
    The FOIA litigation discussed in this report is *Leopold v. U.S.
    Dep't of State*, 15-cv-123 (D.D.C.). [↩](#fnref228){.footnote-back}
    :::

229. ::: {#fn229}
    Congress confirmed Attorney General Lynch on April 23, 2015, and
    Deputy Attorney General Yates on May 13, 2015.
    [↩](#fnref229){.footnote-back}
    :::

230. ::: {#fn230}
    Despite the OIG's repeated attempts, Kadzik's principal deputy in
    OLA, who is no longer with the Department, was unable to accommodate
    the OIG's request for an interview. [↩](#fnref230){.footnote-back}
    :::

231. ::: {#fn231}
    At the time, both Lynch and Yates were U.S. Attorneys and therefore
    they could be provided with Department information as part of their
    briefing materials. [↩](#fnref231){.footnote-back}
    :::

232. ::: {#fn232}
    The hearing was titled "Ensuring an Informed Citizenry: Examining
    the Administration's Efforts to Improve Open Government."
    [↩](#fnref232){.footnote-back}
    :::

233. ::: {#fn233}
    The hearing was before the Judiciary Subcommittee on Regulatory
    Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law and titled "Ongoing Oversight:
    Monitoring the Activities of the Justice Department's

    Civil, Tax and Environment and Natural Resources Divisions and the
    U.S. Trustee Program." [↩](#fnref233){.footnote-back}
    :::

234. ::: {#fn234}
    This email was published by WikiLeaks on November 1, 2016. WikiLeaks
    obtained emails from Podesta's personal email account and released
    those emails online in the weeks leading up to the November 2016
    election. Some of these emails, including this email from RS to
    Podesta, were not sent to or from a DOJ email address, and as such
    we were not able to authenticate them. Where the only source for an
    email was the WikiLeaks publication, we have identified the email as
    such.

    "In January of 2017, our Intelligence Community determined that
    Russian military intelligence---the GRU---had used WikiLeaks to
    release data of US victims that the GRU had obtained through cyber
    operations." Director Pompeo Delivers Remarks at CSIS, April 13,
    2017, available at
    https://www.cia.gov/news-information/speeches-testimony/2017-speeches-testimony/pompeodelivers-remarks-at-csis.html
    (accessed April 25, 2018). The OIG is cognizant of the fact that the
    release of emails discussed in this chapter may be part of this
    cyber operation and our review of this material is in no way
    intended to validate or justify WikiLeaks' data releases.

    We note that the fact that the email became public after Podesta's
    email was allegedly hacked and then released by WikiLeaks did not
    excuse or minimize Kadzik's conduct. While Department leadership did
    not publically acknowledge the authenticity of the illegally hacked
    emails, Axelrod confronted Kadzik (who then authenticated the
    email), recognized the appearance of the conflict and its impact on
    the integrity of the Department, and ensured Kadzik's recusal.
    [↩](#fnref234){.footnote-back}
    :::

235. ::: {#fn235}
    Wikileaks published this email on November 2, 2016. We have no
    independent source for this email. Kadzik told us he did not recall
    it, but did not allege that it was inauthentic or inaccurate.
    Moreover, Kadzik acknowledged its authenticity to Axelrod when the
    "Heads up" email was released. [↩](#fnref235){.footnote-back}
    :::

236. ::: {#fn236}
    Kadzik's "Heads Up" email was not the only email of this type sent
    to the Clinton campaign. According to emails later released by
    WikiLeaks, on May 18, 2015, the same evening the Department filed
    its proposed schedule for releasing the emails, an unidentified
    Department employee emailed the FOIA filing to Fallon at Fallon's
    personal email address and wrote "This was filed tonight."

    Fallon forwarded the email to campaign members including Podesta. As
    noted above, Fallon left the Department at the end of March 2015 to
    join the campaign. Kadzik told the OIG that he had no participation
    in, or knowledge of, the May 18 email to Fallon with the FOIA
    filing. [↩](#fnref236){.footnote-back}
    :::

237. ::: {#fn237}
    We note that upon receiving a September 2016 congressional inquiry
    requesting the appointment of special counsel, Kadzik specifically
    requested the latest Department filing in the FOIA litigation.
    [↩](#fnref237){.footnote-back}
    :::

238. ::: {#fn238}
    The Acting OPA Director said that he spoke to the reporter off the
    record and should not have been quoted because the Department did
    not want to acknowledge illegally obtained emails.
    [↩](#fnref238){.footnote-back}
    :::

239. ::: {#fn239}
    As noted above, despite the OIG's repeated attempts, Kadzik's
    principal deputy, who is no longer with the Department, was unable
    to accommodate the OIG's request for an interview.
    [↩](#fnref239){.footnote-back}
    :::

240. ::: {#fn240}
    Although Clinton was not a named party to the FOIA litigation, it is
    possible that she would be considered a "party" within the meaning
    of Section 502 because the litigation centered around her use of a
    private server and sought emails stored on it. OGE does not take a
    narrow or strictly legal view of what it means to be a party under
    Section 502. OGE letter 01 x 8. As detailed below, we were not
    required to reach this issue. The FOIA litigation indisputably had
    specific parties, even if Clinton was not one of them.
    [↩](#fnref240){.footnote-back}
    :::

241. ::: {#fn241}
    Although RS was a relative of Kadzik's with whom he who presumably
    had a "close personal relationship," this fact did not create a
    "covered relationship" because RS was not a party to the
    Clinton-related investigations, nor did he represent a party.
    [↩](#fnref241){.footnote-back}
    :::

242. ::: {#fn242}
    Kadzik wrote in the email to Fallon that his son was 25 years old;
    however, his son would not turn 25 until later in the year.
    [↩](#fnref242){.footnote-back}
    :::

243. ::: {#fn243}
    Because RS was not a dependent child, and no other "covered
    relationship" appears to be in issue, we were not required to
    determine whether Clinton was a "party" to the FOIA litigation.
    [↩](#fnref243){.footnote-back}
    :::

244. ::: {#fn244}
    We also note that long standing Department policies addressing
    employee participation in political activity place greater
    restrictions on the political activities of presidential appointees
    than does the Hatch Act. The Department's stated purpose for further
    restricting the political activities of political appointees is to
    ensure that "there is not an appearance that politics plays any part
    in the Department's day to day operations." Among other things,
    Department policy prohibited Kadzik from participating in political
    activity "in concert" with a political party, partisan group, or
    candidate for partisan political office, even when off duty. We
    believe that it is a close question whether Kadzik violated
    Department policy by acting "in concert" with the campaign when he
    sent Podesta the "Heads up" email. Even if Kadzik did not violate
    the letter of the Department's policy, he certainly intended to
    provide assistance, however small, directly to Podesta, the campaign
    Chairman, which was inconsistent with the stated intent of the
    policy. *See* James M. Cole, Deputy Attorney General, U.S.
    Department of Justice, memorandum for All Department of Justice
    Non-Career Employees, July 14, 2014,
    https://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/jmd/legacy/2014/03/24/pol-activ-dag-noncareeremployees.pdf
    (accessed June 6, 2018). [↩](#fnref244){.footnote-back}
    :::

245. ::: {#fn245}
    After reviewing a draft of this chapter, Kadzik's attorney submitted
    a letter to the OIG which, among other things, stated that "Mr.
    Kadzik learned the information he shared with Mr. Podesta from the
    Politico article." However, Kadzik's attorney provided no
    evidentiary basis for the statement, and it conflicts with the
    content of the May 19, 2015 "Heads up" email and is inconsistent
    with Kadzik's previous statements to the Department. The Politico
    article (that Kadzik provided to OPR in response to the inquiry that
    arose because of his "Heads up" email) clearly states that the
    proposed schedule was "filed in U.S. District Court in Washington"
    on "Monday night." Yet Kadzik wrote in his Tuesday morning email
    that he did not know if the document had yet been filed and admitted
    the same to Axelrod in November 2016. In addition, in his December
    2016 written response to OPR's inquiry, Kadzik wrote that he "did
    not recall" the source from which he learned the information in his
    email and cited the Politico article only to establish that the
    information had been made public when he sent it to Podesta.
    [↩](#fnref245){.footnote-back}
    :::

246. ::: {#fn246}
    We recognize that Kadzik did not have complete visibility into all
    Department matters (particularly the closely-held Clinton email
    investigation). However, recusals not only serve to prevent an
    employee from affecting a particular investigation or litigation,
    but also serve to prevent an employee from receiving and misusing
    Department information. Once an employee is recused from a

    matter, the employee must fully respect the recusal and cease all
    participation or seek a determination by the agency designee under
    section 502(d). [↩](#fnref246){.footnote-back}
    :::

247. ::: {#fn247}
    In his email, Kadzik also said that the Civil Division Chief may be
    asked questions about the Clinton emails in the congressional
    hearing scheduled that day. However, Kadzik's opinion was not based
    on nonpublic information, as notice of the hearing had been posted
    on the committee's website and congressional interest in the Clinton
    emails was public information. We note that the Civil Division Chief
    was not asked questions about the Clinton email server during the
    hearing. [↩](#fnref247){.footnote-back}
    :::

248. ::: {#fn248}
    The posting date for the records on the Vault is October 31, 2016,
    but the RIDS Section Chief and a RIDS analyst told us that October
    31 reflects the date when the records were uploaded into the system
    to be reviewed by RIDS and OPA personnel, but not the date the
    records were published for the public.
    [↩](#fnref248){.footnote-back}
    :::

249. ::: {#fn249}
    The average processing times are based on regular analysis of queue
    processing times by RIDS personnel in order to provide estimated
    completion dates to FOIA requestors. [↩](#fnref249){.footnote-back}
    :::

250. ::: {#fn250}
    The Assistant Section Chief of RIDS could make the determination in
    the absence of the Section Chief. [↩](#fnref250){.footnote-back}
    :::

251. ::: {#fn251}
    The subsequent requests were dated April 1, 2016; July 13, 2016;
    July 14, 2016; August 16, 2016; August 17, 2016; and August
    30, 2016. [↩](#fnref251){.footnote-back}
    :::

252. ::: {#fn252}
    The public FBI Records Vault webpage indicates that the Clinton
    Foundation documents were posted on October 31, 2016. However, the
    RIDS Section Chief and the SGIS told us that this date refers to
    when the documents were uploaded to the system for review by RIDS
    and OPA. The documents were not made available to the public until
    November 1, 2016. [↩](#fnref252){.footnote-back}
    :::

253. ::: {#fn253}
    On September 2, 2016, the FBI posted Hillary Clinton's July 2, 2016
    interview with the FBI concerning allegations that classified
    information was improperly stored or transmitted on a personal email
    server she used during her tenure. [↩](#fnref253){.footnote-back}
    :::

254. ::: {#fn254}
    We did not perform an independent audit of RIDS' medium queue, but
    utilized the averages as reported to us by the RIDS Section Chief
    and Assistant Section Chief. [↩](#fnref254){.footnote-back}
    :::

255. ::: {#fn255}
    The OIG's findings and recommendations related to other recusal
    issues and contained in the

    Law Enforcement Sensitive (LES) Appendix Two, are addressed
    separately in the appended LES response.

    [↩](#fnref255){.footnote-back}
    :::

256. ::: {#fn256}
    Identifying a different type of potential bias, the OIG Report also
    found it improper for Ms. Page to comment on or consider how the
    approach to interviewing former Secretary Clinton might affect the
    FBI's interests if she won the presidency. The FBI agrees with this
    finding. [↩](#fnref256){.footnote-back}
    :::
:::


